[Page 1]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide
Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Yiming Pan1∗
Chengwei Hu2
Xuancheng Huang2†
Can Huang2
Mingming Zhao2
Yuean Bi2
Xiaohan Zhang2
Aohan Zeng2
Linmei Hu1†
1 Beijing Institute of Technology
2 Zhipu AI (Z.ai)
(A) Distorted Aspect Ratio
(B) Excessive Whitespace
(C) Element Collision
(D) Visual Imbalance
Common Aesthetic Issues in Slide Generation
Reinforcement Learning for Aesthetic Slide Generation
Verifiable
Aesthetic
Metrics
GLM-4.7-Flash (30B-A3B)
GLM-4.7-AeSlides
Reinforcement
Learning
Verifiable
Rewards
Results
Generated
Slides
Standard Aspect Ratio  
Efficient Layout  
Organized Elements  
 
Visual Balance
Figure 1: Overview of the AeSlides workflow. Left: Four categories of aesthetic deficiencies commonly observed in LLM-based
slide generation. Center: A suite of verifiable aesthetic metrics is introduced and integrated into reinforcement learning to
guide the model toward producing visually coherent slide layouts. Right: Representative slides generated by GLM-4.7-AeSlides.
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong potential
in agentic tasks, particularly in slide generation. However, slide
generation poses a fundamental challenge: the generation process
is text-centric, whereas its quality is governed by visual aesthet-
ics. This modality gap leads current models to frequently produce
slides with aesthetically suboptimal layouts. Existing solutions typ-
ically rely either on heavy visual reflection, which incurs high
inference cost yet yields limited gains; or on fine-tuning with large-
scale datasets, which still provides weak and indirect aesthetic
supervision. In contrast, the explicit use of aesthetic principles as
supervision remains unexplored. In this work, we present AeS-
lides, a reinforcement learning framework with verifiable rewards
for Aesthetic layout supervision in Slide generation. We intro-
duce a suite of meticulously designed verifiable metrics to quantify
slide layout quality, capturing key layout issues in an accurate,
efficient, and low-cost manner. Leveraging these verifiable met-
rics, we develop a GRPO-based reinforcement learning method
that directly optimizes slide generation models for aesthetically
coherent layouts. With only 5K training prompts on GLM-4.7-Flash,
AeSlides improves aspect ratio compliance from 36% to 85%, while
reducing whitespace by 44%, element collisions by 43%, and visual
imbalance by 28%. Human evaluation further shows a substan-
tial improvement in overall quality, increasing scores from 3.31
∗Work done during internship at Zhipu AI.
†Corresponding authors.
to 3.56 (+7.6%), outperforming both model-based reward optimiza-
tion and reflection-based agentic approaches, and even edging out
Claude-Sonnet-4.5. These results demonstrate that such a verifiable
aesthetic paradigm provides an efficient and scalable approach to
aligning slide generation with human aesthetic preferences. Our
code, datasets, and model checkpoints are publicly available at
https://github.com/ympan0508/aeslides.
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies →Natural language processing;
Reinforcement learning; Computer vision; • Applied computing
→Multi / mixed media creation; • Human-centered computing
→Visualization design and evaluation methods.
Keywords
Slide Generation, Verifiable Aesthetic Metrics, Reinforcement Learn-
ing, Large Language Models, Multimedia Content Creation
1
Introduction
Slides are a widely used medium for communicating structured
information in domains such as education, business, and scien-
tific presentation. While recent advances in agentic capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) have enabled substantial progress in
complex tasks such as software engineering [30], slide generation
remains particularly challenging, as it requires not only semantic
coherence but also precise control over visual layout. In practice,
current models often fail to produce aesthetically sound layouts.
arXiv:2604.22840v1  [cs.CV]  21 Apr 2026

[Page 2]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
While LLMs typically generate slides as structured textual markup,
slide quality is inherently evaluated in the visual domain. This
modality gap between text-based generation and vision-based eval-
uation limits the effectiveness of text-only supervision, leading
even proprietary models such as Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and GPT-5.2 to
frequently produce slides with aesthetic layout issues.
Early slide generation approaches primarily rely on predefined
templates [1, 3], which restrict flexibility and fail to accommo-
date diverse user requirements. Recent works [6, 11, 23, 28, 37, 38]
adopt agentic frameworks that perform iterative refinement, lever-
aging multimodal feedback to identify and correct rendering defects.
While effective for coarse issues such as severely broken layouts,
these methods are constrained by the limited visual perception
capabilities and often fail to address fine-grained aesthetic issues.
Another line of work [34] attempts to fine-tune LLMs on large-scale
curated datasets to implicitly learn aesthetic preferences; however,
the modality gap continues to hinder further improvement. This
leads to a key question: Can aesthetic competence be directly inter-
nalized into the model, rather than corrected through post-generation
refinement or implicit supervision? We observe that many fundamen-
tal aesthetic properties of slide layouts are inherently structured and
can be precisely verified through programmatic analysis. This ob-
servation suggests an alternative paradigm: aesthetic layout quality
can be explicitly optimized through verifiable reward signals.
To address these challenges, we propose AeSlides, a reinforce-
ment learning framework with verifiable rewards for improving
aesthetic slide generation. We first construct two datasets targeting
slide aesthetic quality: one for meta-evaluation of aesthetic metrics
and another for reinforcement learning. Based on four key aesthetic
issues observed in slide generation (as illustrated in Figure 1), we
introduce a suite of meticulously designed verifiable metrics. Meta-
evaluation results show that, compared to vision-language models
(VLM)-based detections, these metrics achieve higher accuracy,
lower latency, and reduced cost across all dimensions. Leveraging
these metrics, we develop a Group Relative Policy Optimization [21]
(GRPO)-based reinforcement learning method that directly opti-
mizes aesthetic quality via verifiable reward signals.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that AeSlides substantially
improves aesthetic layout quality in slide generation. On GLM-4.7-
Flash, using only 5k training prompts, AeSlides increases the aspect
ratio compliance rate from 36% to 85%, reduces excessive white-
space by 44%, decreases element collisions by 43%, and mitigates
visual imbalance by 28%. Human evaluation further confirms a sig-
nificant improvement in overall quality, raising the score from 3.31
to 3.56. Additionally, with single-pass generation, AeSlides consis-
tently outperforms reflection-based iterative methods, surpasses
model-based reward optimization, and even edges out proprietary
Claude-Sonnet-4.5. These results validate the effectiveness of re-
inforcement learning with verifiable aesthetic rewards for slide
generation. Further analysis also reveals the unreliability of model-
based metrics and rewards, highlighting that our verifiable reward
design is a key factor in improving slide layout aesthetics.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
(1) We introduce a reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards
paradigm in slide generation, enabling direct optimization of
layout aesthetics to mitigate the modality gap.
(2) We design a suite of accurate and efficient verifiable metrics
that decompose layout aesthetics into measurable subproblems,
supporting both RL optimization and reliable slide evaluation.
(3) Extensive experiments demonstrate consistent improvements
across all metrics and overall evaluation, outperforming strong
baselines and validating the effectiveness of verifiable rewards.
2
Related Work
2.1
LLM-Based Slide Generation
Benefiting from capabilities in language understanding and genera-
tion, LLMs have become the primary backbone of slide generation.
Early approaches mainly use LLMs for content generation, while
relying on predefined templates for layout and visual design, as in
DOC2PPT [3] and KCTV [1]. However, template-based methods
struggle to accommodate diverse requirements in layout flexibility,
visual styling, and compositional design. With the rise of agentic
LLMs, recent systems decompose slide generation into structured
workflows involving background research, global planning, and
tool-based editing, such as PPTAgent [37], AutoPresent [6], and
Talk-to-Your-Slides [9]. Despite improved flexibility, these methods
still lack explicit aesthetic constraints. As a result, they either pro-
duce over-conservative layouts (e.g., simple bullet-point lists) or
exhibit unstable visual quality when handling complex designs.
Recent work attempts to address the modality gap between text-
based generation and vision-based evaluation along two directions.
One adopts post-generation visual reflection for iterative refine-
ment [11, 28, 38], but incurs high inference cost while yielding
only limited improvement in aesthetic quality. The other direc-
tion relies on supervised training over large-scale curated slide
datasets [34], where aesthetic signals are still implicitly learned via
textual patterns, resulting in indirect and weak supervision. In con-
trast, directly internalizing aesthetic principles into the base model
through training remains largely underexplored. As advances in
coding capabilities [24, 33] enable LLMs to directly generate struc-
tured slide representations in a single pass (e.g., via HTML or Slidev),
the lack of explicit aesthetic modeling becomes more critical.
2.2
Reinforcement Learning in LLMs
In-domain adaptation of LLMs to acquire specialized expertise has
been extensively studied. Early approaches primarily rely on SFT to
inject domain knowledge and capabilities, while subsequent meth-
ods leverage human feedback, either through direct preference
alignment (DPO) [20] or online reinforcement learning (RL) [17].
However, the offline nature of DPO and the computational burden
of online RLHF have limited their scalability across diverse vertical
domains. The introduction of GRPO [21] provides a lightweight
yet effective alternative, enabling arbitrary reward signals to be
directly optimized. This paradigm has demonstrated strong per-
formance in domains with verifiable feedback, such as coding [15]
and mathematics [21]. Follow-up works [5, 12, 16, 31, 32, 35, 36]
further improve training stability and effectiveness, especially for
MoE models, long-context tasks, and multi-reward settings, consol-
idating GRPO as a practical choice for reinforcement learning.
However, in slide generation, applying RL remains challenging
due to the abstract nature of aesthetic requirements. In related do-
mains such as webpage and UI generation, prior work [8, 19, 29]

[Page 3]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
employs VLMs as reward models or rubric generators to provide
reward signals. In contrast, our experiments reveal that current
VLMs exhibit notable aesthetic blind spots for slide layouts, which
limits the transferability of such approaches to slide generation.
In this work, we instead explore an alternative paradigm by in-
troducing a suite of meticulously designed verifiable metrics that
decompose aesthetic layout issues into verifiable subproblems com-
monly encountered in slide generation. These metrics are used
as vision-based rewards to train slide generation models. This ap-
proach provides a practical way to narrow the modality gap be-
tween generation and evaluation, enabling models to produce slides
with improved aesthetic quality aligned with human preferences.
3
Task Definition
Slide generation is inherently an agentic task. In its general form, it
constitutes a long-horizon process: given a user query 𝑄, a model
𝐺𝜃first needs to acquire a richer supporting context 𝐶through
steps such as external information retrieval, image search, user
intent clarification, and high-level planning. Conditioned on 𝑄and
𝐶, the model then sequentially generates a slide deck in HTML
format, producing slides page by page until completion. In this
work, to enable clear disentanglement and attribution of the model’s
capability in generating aesthetically coherent slides, we focus on
a controlled subproblem: prefix-conditioned next-slide generation.
Specifically, at step 𝑡, given the query 𝑄, the context 𝐶, and the
preceding slides 𝑃<𝑡, the model generates the next slide
𝑃𝑡∼𝐺𝜃(𝑄,𝐶, 𝑃<𝑡).
(1)
We then evaluate and optimize 𝑃𝑡with respect to aesthetic metrics.
Concretely, current slide generation models often exhibit several
recurring issues in layout aesthetics, which can be mainly cate-
gorized into four types: (i) distorted aspect ratio, where the model
fails to account for the spatial extent of generated content, leading
to layouts that deviate significantly from the standard 16:9 aspect
ratio; (ii) excessive whitespace, where the page is not effectively
utilized, resulting in large unused regions and a visually sparse ap-
pearance; (iii) element collision, where elements overlap with each
other, exceed their parent container, or fall outside the slide bound-
ary; and (iv) visual imbalance, where poor layout leads to uneven
content distribution and a perceptual bias of visual weight toward
one side of the slide. We illustrate one representative example of
each category in Figure 1. In this work, we focus on addressing
these four issues as primary factors affecting aesthetic slide quality.
4
Data Preparation
We first collect a set of slide deck generation trajectories produced
by LLMs, covering multiple languages and domains. Using rule-
based preprocessing, we filter out failed trajectories and decompose
the remaining ones into page-level samples, corresponding to the
prefix-conditioned formulation defined in Equation 1. On top of
this processed data, we construct two datasets to support aesthetic
evaluation and optimization of slide generation:
(i) AeSlides-Reward-Bench. This dataset is designed for meta-
evaluation of aesthetic metrics. We recruit and train six annotators
with prior experience in slide design. They annotate slide pages
with a fine-grained taxonomy of aesthetic flaws, consisting of 4
major categories and 21 subcategories, including the primary layout-
related issues addressed in this work (as described in Section 3),
while the remaining subcategories are reserved for future explo-
ration. We publicly release this dataset to facilitate further research
on additional optimization dimensions for slide generation.
(ii) AeSlides-7k. This dataset is used for training and evaluat-
ing slide generation models. We apply heuristic rules to remove
structurally simple pages, including cover pages, tables of contents,
dividers, and ending pages. These pages are excluded because ex-
isting models already achieve relatively strong aesthetic quality on
them, and the design principles they follow differ from those of
content-intensive slides. The resulting dataset is then split at the
deck level into training and evaluation sets with a ratio of 85:15.
Detailed annotation protocols, metadata and statistics of the
datasets are provided in Appendix A in supplementary materials.
5
Methodology
5.1
Verifiable Metrics for Slide Assessment
To address the four aesthetic issues defined in Section 3, we design
a suite of rule-based, verifiable metrics for automatic detection.
Render Infrastructure. We first build a distributed and decou-
pled rendering server based on Playwright, FastAPI, and Uvicorn
to support high-throughput rendering and metric computation
during rollout and evaluation. Upon receiving HTML content, the
server renders the page while injecting JavaScript scripts to col-
lect runtime metadata and properties (e.g., page sizes, document
object model (DOM) trees, and element bounding-boxes). The ren-
dered image bytes, original HTML, and runtime properties are then
passed to corresponding metric functions as needed. The entire
pipeline is executed in a streaming and concurrent manner, yield-
ing high throughput. Decoupling rollout from metric computation
also allows training hardware to focus on rollout generation and
parameter updates, thereby improving overall training efficiency.
Detecting distorted aspect ratio. Since most slides adopt re-
sponsive layouts, measuring the actual aspect ratio requires a dy-
namic procedure. We first initialize a small viewport (1280 × 10)
to load the page. After rendering is complete, a JavaScript script is
executed to retrieve the maximum value among the scrollHeight
and offsetHeight of both body and html. The viewport height is
then reset to this value, and a screenshot is taken to obtain the final
width and height of the rendered slide.
Original Slide
Normalized Local Variance Map
Figure 2: Visualization of our excessive whitespace detection.
Left: original slide. Right: the slide overlaid with a normalized
local variance map, where red regions indicate low local pixel
variation and are identified as whitespace.
Detecting excessive whitespace. We adopt a lightweight vision-
based method for whitespace detection. Specifically, we define

[Page 4]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Metric Type
Distorted Aspect Ratio
Excessive Whitespace
Element Collision
Visual Imbalance
Latency ↓
Cost ↓
F1 ↑
F2 ↑
ROC-AUC ↑
F1 ↑
F2 ↑
ROC-AUC ↑
F1 ↑
F2 ↑
ROC-AUC ↑
F1 ↑
F2 ↑
ROC-AUC ↑
Coin-Flip Baseline
0.58
0.54
0.50
0.51
0.50
0.50
0.13
0.23
0.50
0.22
0.33
0.50
-
-
GPT-5.2
0.24
0.17
0.56
0.73
0.82
0.71
0.43
0.45
0.70
0.36
0.57
0.77
∼8000ms
∼$200
GPT-5-mini
0.54
0.43
0.68
0.41
0.31
0.61
0.19
0.13
0.55
0.47
0.56
0.75
∼10000ms
∼$30
GPT-5-nano
0.34
0.25
0.58
0.59
0.59
0.58
0.18
0.14
0.55
0.42
0.56
0.75
∼12000ms
∼$6
Verifiable Metrics (Ours)
0.83
0.91
0.77
0.80
0.88
0.89
0.47
0.51
0.79
0.61
0.77
0.83
∼4000ms
∼$0
Table 1: Meta-evaluation of our verifiable aesthetic layout metrics and VLM-based detection. Cost denotes the estimated
detection cost per 50k samples; detailed estimation method is provided in Appendix B. Latency refers to the end-to-end detection
latency, both including approximately ∼3000ms rendering time. For VLM-based methods, latency further includes network
request overhead and remote model inference time, while for verifiable methods, it further includes metric computation time.
“whitespace” as regions lacking significant local pixel variation,
and compute a local variance map to estimate the proportion of
effective content. Specifically, the procedure consists of: (i) convert
the image 𝐼to grayscale, yielding 𝐼′; (ii) use box filters to compute
the local variance map Var(𝑥,𝑦) over a rectangular neighborhood
Ω ⊂Z2 centered at (𝑥,𝑦) with size 𝐻×𝑊(we use 𝐻=201,𝑊=151):
𝜇(𝑥,𝑦) = 1
|Ω|
∑︁
(𝑖,𝑗)∈Ω
𝐼′(𝑥+ 𝑖,𝑦+ 𝑗)
(2)
Var(𝑥,𝑦) = 1
|Ω|
∑︁
(𝑖,𝑗)∈Ω
(𝐼′(𝑥+ 𝑖,𝑦+ 𝑗) −𝜇(𝑥,𝑦))2
(3)
(iii) obtain the standard deviation 𝜎(𝑥,𝑦) =
√︁
Var(𝑥,𝑦), followed
by clipping and normalization to calculate the local variance map
𝐹(𝑥,𝑦) = min(𝜎(𝑥,𝑦),𝑇clip)
𝑇clip
(4)
where smaller 𝐹(𝑥,𝑦) indicates low-frequency regions correspond-
ing to whitespace; (iv) binarizing the map using a threshold𝜏= 0.05,
removing boundary regions (as peripheral redundancy is accept-
able), and computing the ratio of content and whitespace areas.
We visualize this process in Figure 2, where red regions denote
detected whitespace. The use of a large neighborhood implicitly
provides tolerance for spacing between elements, avoiding overly
fine-grained responses to intra-element gaps (e.g., character/line
spacing). This makes the metric monotonic and easier to optimize.
Detecting element collision. We adopt heuristic rules based on
the DOM tree and element bounding boxes. First, we extract “visual
units” by filtering out invisible elements, non-semantic nodes, and
overly fine-grained primitives (e.g., SVG primitives), to better align
with human perception. Based on these units, we identify three
types of collision events: (i) overlapping bounding boxes between
elements without ancestor relationships; (ii) elements escaping
from their parent containers; (iii) elements overflowing beyond the
slide boundary. Certain cases that do not affect perceived quality
(e.g., watermarks, weak transparent backgrounds, corner badges,
annotation labels) are excluded unless they occlude main content.
The remaining events are reweighted to compute a collision score,
where higher scores indicate more severe layout conflicts.
Detecting visual imbalance. Similar to collision detection, vi-
sual imbalance is computed based on the DOM tree. After extracting
visual units, we compute the visual centroid of the entire layout
and measure its offset from the canvas center using an ellipse-
normalized distance. Let (𝑥,𝑦) ∈[0, 1]2 denote the normalized
coordinates of the visual centroid, and (𝑥𝑐,𝑦𝑐) the canvas center.
The ellipse-normalized distance is defined as
𝑑=
√︄𝑥−𝑥𝑐
𝑥tol
2
+
𝑦−𝑦𝑐
𝑦tol
2
,
(5)
where 𝑥tol and 𝑦tol are tolerance parameters along two axes. Since
horizontal imbalance is more perceptually salient, we set 𝑥tol = 0.05
and 𝑦tol = 0.15. Larger values of 𝑑indicate more severe imbalance.
Reward Hacking Mitigation. During training, we observe that
the model may exploit these metrics via reward hacking. Instead
of introducing explicit penalties (which empirically lead to rapid
abandonment of error-prone patterns and collapse of the policy
space), we iteratively refine the rendering pipelines to eliminate ex-
ploitable shortcuts. Specifically: (i) for aspect ratio, the model tends
to enforce layout constraints using attributes such as min-height
and overflow: hidden, which deviates from our objective of learn-
ing proper content quantity and layout adjustments. We therefore
normalize the HTML using cssutils and remove such attributes
in the aspect ratio pipeline; (ii) for whitespace detection, the model
may insert textured backgrounds or external background images
to artificially increase local variance. To address this, we remove
background images and apply a small Gaussian filter (kernel size
= 21) before box filtering to smooth texture-induced variance.
Meta-evaluation and comparison with VLM-based detec-
tion. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed metrics, we addi-
tionally integrate VLM-based detection as a metric within the ren-
der infrastructure. Given a rendered slide, the VLM outputs a score
in the range of 0–5 for each of the four issue dimensions, where
lower scores indicate more severe problems. We conduct a meta-
evaluation on the four aesthetic issue categories using AeSlides-
Reward-Bench, comparing the proposed verifiable metrics with
VLM-based detection. We report F1, F2, ROC-AUC, the average end-
to-end latency, and the cost per 50k samples (comparable to the
number required to train one epoch on our dataset). The classifica-
tion threshold is selected according to the optimal F2 criterion. The
latency includes image rendering time (∼3000ms). The correspond-
ing detection prompts are provided in Appendix C.1. As shown in
Table 1, VLM-based methods perform poorly on most dimensions,
in some cases even worse than random guessing. Notably, even a
frontier model such as GPT-5.2 exhibits a clear failure in aspect ratio
perception: despite being provided with explicit criteria, it tends to
classify nearly all input slides as satisfying the aspect ratio require-
ment, even when the ratio is close to 1:1. In addition, VLM-based

[Page 5]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
detection is less efficient, and also incurs higher cost. We further ex-
plore several variants, including enabling chain-of-thought reason-
ing [27], replacing scalar scores with binary outputs, and adopting
G-Eval-style logit weighting [13]; none of these approaches lead
to improved detection accuracy. For Element Collision and Visual
Imbalance, there exists an inherent ambiguity in the labels, where
some samples are borderline cases, which leads to moderate F1 and
F2 scores for our method. However, the consistently higher ROC-
AUC indicates strong ranking ability, suggesting that the metrics
remain suitable for reward computation in reinforcement learning.
5.2
RL with Verifiable Rewards
After constructing the metrics for evaluating the aesthetic quality of
slide layouts, we employ them as reward signals in Reinforcement
Learning (RL) to incentivize the model toward aesthetic layout in
slide generation. We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization
(GRPO) [21] as the starting point, which can be formulated as
JGRPO(𝜃) = E𝑥𝑖∼D,{𝑦𝑗}𝐺
𝑗=1∼𝜋𝜃old (·|𝑥𝑖)
"
1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
1
|𝑦𝑗|
|𝑦𝑗|
∑︁
𝑡=1

min

𝑤𝑗,𝑡(𝜃) ˆ𝐴𝑗,𝑡, clip 𝑤𝑗,𝑡(𝜃), 1 −𝜀, 1 + 𝜀 ˆ𝐴𝑗,𝑡

−𝛽𝐷KL(𝜋𝜃∥𝜋ref)
# (6)
Building upon this framework, we incorporate a set of auxiliary
mechanisms that have been widely validated in prior work, includ-
ing: (i) clip-higher and token-level loss proposed in DAPO [32];
(ii) sequence-level importance ratio introduced in GSPO [36]; and
(iii) rollout routing replay [16]. Prior work has both empirically
validated and theoretically characterized these mechanisms, show-
ing that they effectively stabilize training in Mixture-of-Experts
LLMs as well as in long-context generation tasks. In addition, we
introduce several task-specific designs tailored to slide generation:
(i) KL divergence regularization. Recent studies [14, 32] sug-
gest that, in long-context generation tasks, the optimized policy
may significantly deviate from the initialization, and therefore advo-
cate removing the KL divergence constraint. In contrast, we retain
the KL regularization term. Our base model has been supervised
on a large corpus of high-quality slide data, ensuring strong con-
tent fidelity while exhibiting deficiencies in visual aesthetics. Our
objective is to refine the model’s aesthetic behavior, which typi-
cally involves adjusting a subset of layout-related HTML attributes
rather than substantially altering semantic content. Therefore, we
do not expect significant distributional drift in model parameters.
The KL term is thus preserved as a prior constraint to maintain
alignment with the initialization model.
(ii) Reward shaping. The reinforcement learning setup in this
work involves multiple reward components. Prior work [12] has
shown that, under standard GRPO, different reward components
may exhibit significantly different variance scales, which can lead
to reward signal collapse during optimization. We also provide a
simple theoretical justification in Appendix D. To address this issue,
we design tailored reward shaping strategies.
For the aspect ratio metric, which follows a “nominal-the-best”
pattern with an optimal value of 16:9, the reward should decrease
on both sides of the optimum. Empirically, we observe that overlong
slides (i.e., smaller aspect ratios) occur more frequently, and thus
decide to impose additional penalties on this regime. Specifically,
we design an asymmetric quadratic reward
R(𝑥) = exp

−𝛼 log(
𝑥
target)2−𝛽·max  −log(
𝑥
target)−𝑚, 02

(7)
where 𝑥is the aspect ratio, target is 16:9, 𝑚denotes the margin con-
trolling tolerance for overlong cases, 𝛼adjusts the overall penalty,
while 𝛽controls the additional penalty for overlong deviations.
For the remaining three monotonic metrics, we adopt a unified
strategy. We define lower and upper thresholds, beyond which the
metric values are clipped to binary rewards (0 or 1), treating them
as equally poor or equally good. Within this interval, we apply a
smoothstep transformation. Overall, the reward is formulated as
R(𝑥) =


1,
𝑥≤lower
0,
𝑥≥upper
3𝑢2 −2𝑢3,
otherwise
where 𝑢=
upper−𝑥
upper−lower
(8)
where 𝑥is the original metric value (higher indicates worse quality),
lower and upper determine the truncation bounds.
(iii) Reward-decoupled normalization. To further stabilize
multi-reward optimization, beyond reward shaping, we incorporate
reward-decoupled normalization following GDPO [12]. Specifically,
when computing the advantage for rollout samples, each reward
component is normalized independently. Let 𝑟(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗denote the 𝑘-th
reward component for the 𝑗-th rollout under the 𝑖-th prompt
𝐴(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗=
𝑟(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗−E𝑗′∼{1,...,𝐺} [𝑟(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗′ ]
std𝑗′∼{1,...,𝐺} [𝑟(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗′ ] + 𝜀
,
𝑘= 1, . . . , 𝐾
(9)
𝐴𝑖,𝑗=
∑︁
𝑘
𝐴(𝑘)
𝑖,𝑗
(10)
where 𝐺is the number of rollouts per prompt, and 𝐾is the num-
ber of reward components. Following [12], to maintain a stable
numerical range, a batch-wise normalization is further applied
ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑗= 𝐴𝑖,𝑗−E𝑖′∈𝐷batch, 𝑗′∈{1,...,𝐺} [𝐴𝑖′,𝑗′]
std𝑖′∈𝐷batch, 𝑗′∈{1,...,𝐺} [𝐴𝑖′,𝑗′] + 𝜀
(11)
The resulting advantage is then assigned to each rollout and broad-
cast to all tokens in the generated response.
(iv) Error handling. If no valid HTML is generated, or if the
generated HTML fails to render, the overall reward is set to 0.
Equivalently, this can be viewed as defining the overall reward as
a conditional reward, which implicitly enforces output validity as
the highest-priority requirement.
In summary, our policy optimization objective is formulated as
JAeSlides(𝜃) = E𝑥𝑖∼D,{𝑦𝑗}𝐺
𝑗=1∼𝜋𝜃old (·|𝑥𝑖)
"
1
Í𝐺
𝑗=1 |𝑦𝑗|
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
|𝑦𝑗|
∑︁
𝑡=1

min

𝑠𝑗(𝜃) ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑗,𝑡, clip 𝑠𝑗(𝜃), 1 −𝜀low, 1 + 𝜀high
 ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑗,𝑡

−𝛽𝐷KL(𝜋𝜃∥𝜋ref)
#
(12)
where the highlighted parts correspond to clip-higher, token-level
loss, sequence-level importance ratio, reward-decoupled normal-
ization, KL divergence, respectively.

[Page 6]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Verifiable Metrics
VLM Score
Model
Render Error ↓
A.R. ↑
E.W. ↓
E.C. ↓
V.I. ↓
GPT-5-mini ↑
GPT-5.2 ↑
Human Evaluation ↑
Proprietary Models
GPT-5.2
1.65%
10%/26%
0.039
0.254
1.322
4.454
4.154
3.076
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00%
14%/32%
0.034
0.097
1.319
4.538
4.121
3.442
Methodological Variants
Base Model (GLM-4.7-Flash)
0.78%
24%/36%
0.059
0.126
1.545
4.654
3.988
3.314
+ DeepPresenter w/ heavy reflection
1.74%
27%/41%
0.070
0.212
2.170
4.396
3.875
3.107
+ Static GPT-5-nano Reward
1.07%
39%/55%
0.084
0.146
1.921
4.117
3.920
-
+ Static GPT-5-mini Reward
0.87%
51%/64%
0.053
0.161
1.754
4.638
4.018
3.308
+ Visual GPT-5-nano Reward
0.00%
25%/37%
0.100
0.167
1.914
4.234
3.932
-
+ Visual GPT-5-mini Reward
0.00%
28%/45%
0.049
0.106
1.472
4.754
4.033
3.354
+ Verifiable Rewards
0.00%
64%/75%
0.032
0.087
1.071
4.729
4.042
3.435
+ Verifiable Rewards w/ GDPO
0.00%
76%/85%
0.033
0.072
1.111
4.771
4.058
3.561
Table 2: Main experimental results. Different colors are used to highlight different types of variants: proprietary models,
base model, agentic reflection, RL with model-based reward, and RL with verifiable rewards (Ours). Within the Methodolog-
ical Variants group, the best results are highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are marked with underlining. A.R.:
aspect ratio compliance under tolerances of 1% and 5%, E.W.: excessive whitespace, E.C.: element collision, V.I.: visual imbalance.
6
Experiments
6.1
Experimental Setup
Training. We implement the method introduced in Section 5 within
the slime [39] framework and perform RL training on GLM-4.7-
Flash (30B-A3B) [34]. The model has been extensively trained on
slide data during SFT; our goal is to further enhance its capability
in generating aesthetically coherent slides. All experiments are
conducted on a single node with 8×H100 GPUs. We train for 1 epoch
on AeSlides-7k-train. For each sample, we generate 8 rollouts to
perform GRPO-style advantage estimation. The rollout temperature
is set to 1. The maximum response length is 8192 tokens. Additional
training details and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix E.1,
and the full training dynamics are provided in Appendix E.2.
Evaluation. We evaluate on AeSlides-7k-eval using the follow-
ing metrics: (i) Rendering error rate, measuring the proportion of
generated slides that fail to render. (ii) Verifiable aesthetic metrics
introduced in Section 5. For aspect ratio, we report size compliance
under tolerances of 1% and 5% with respect to the standard 16:9 ra-
tio. For the other three categories, we report the raw scores, where
higher values indicate more severe issues. (iii) VLM-score, computed
using an LLM-as-a-judge protocol. Specifically, we employ GPT-5.2
and GPT-5-mini to assign an overall quality score to each rendered
slide on a 0–5 scale; the evaluation prompt is provided in Appen-
dix C.2. (iv) Human evaluation. For a subset of strong models, we
further conduct human evaluation focusing on aesthetic layout
quality. For each query, annotators with prior experience in slide
design jointly examine outputs and assign scores from all models
(anonymized and in random order), to ensure a consistent evalua-
tion scale. Given the inherently subjective nature of the task, the
inter-annotator agreement is satisfactory: approximately 70% of
score differences are within 1 point, and the intraclass correlation
coefficient ICC(3, 1) [22] is around 0.7. The final score is reported
as the average across annotators. Additional statistics and analysis
of human evaluation results are provided in Appendix E.3.
Baselines. To accurately assess the effectiveness of AeSlides
in improving aesthetic slide generation, we consider four groups
of baselines. (i) Proprietary models: Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and GPT-
5.2, which generate slides for the same set of prefix-conditioned
queries. (ii) Base model: GLM-4.7-Flash, i.e., the initialization model
before RL training. (iii) Agentic reflection on the base model: we
adopt DeepPresenter [38], a state-of-the-art open-source slide gen-
eration framework, integrated with the base model. DeepPresenter
performs post-generation reflection to identify aesthetic issues and
iteratively refine the slides. Since GLM-4.7-Flash does not support
multimodal input, we pair it with a comparable multimodal model,
GLM-4.6V-Flash [7], to enable heavy reflection capabilities of Deep-
Presenter (max reflection rounds = 10). (iv) RL with model-based re-
ward: to examine the effect of verifiable rewards, we train additional
models using the same RL pipeline but with model-based reward
signals. We employ two reward models (GPT-5-mini and GPT-5-
nano; GPT-5.2 or larger models are excluded due to prohibitive
training cost, see Table 1) and consider two reward formulations:
scoring static HTML directly, and scoring visual slides.
6.2
Main Results
We report the main experimental results in Table 2. Additional
results, such as human evaluation win rates, Bradley-Terry scores,
statistical significance tests, etc., are provided in Appendix E.3
and E.4. We analyze the results from the following perspectives:
Effectiveness of RL with verifiable aesthetic rewards. Com-
pared with the base model, RL with verifiable rewards yields consis-
tent and substantial improvements across all four verifiable metrics.
These gains also translate into higher VLM-based scores and human
evaluation scores, matching and even slightly edging out propri-
etary Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (+0.12 pts, 52% win rate). This suggests that
(i) leveraging verifiable metrics as reward signals for reinforcement
learning is both effective and generalizable, and (ii) these metrics
are well aligned with overall quality assessments.
Comparison with agentic approaches. Compared to the base
model, DeepPresenter shows no performance gains and instead
consistently degrades across all metrics and human evaluation. A

[Page 7]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
closer inspection reveals that approximately 70% of samples termi-
nate after only a single round of reflection, as the VLM prematurely
concludes that the output satisfies the aesthetic criteria, despite
evident layout issues. In contrast, about 0.4% of samples exhaust all
10 reflection rounds without reaching a satisfactory solution. We
attribute this to two factors: (i) the reflection mechanism in Deep-
Presenter primarily targets content-oriented quality and global
coherence; while it can resolve severe failures (e.g., broken layouts),
finer-grained aesthetic properties are still constrained by the capa-
bility of the backbone; (ii) current VLMs fail to provide sufficiently
precise and actionable visual feedback for iterative refinement of
subtle aesthetic details (see “Limitations of VLM-based scoring”
below). In addition, the agentic pipeline increases prompt tokens by
155% and completion tokens by 46%, introducing substantial compu-
tational overhead. Overall, we find that improving slide aesthetics
currently relies more effectively on explicit aesthetic supervision
during training, rather than additional agentic engineering.
Comparison with model-based rewards. With sufficient ca-
pacity, the reward model can provide modest improvements in
overall aesthetic quality, but fails to deliver consistent gains across
all dimensions. Static rewards are effective for dimensions with
well-defined rules (e.g., aspect ratio) but less sensitive to visually
grounded properties. In contrast, visual rewards better capture per-
ceptible defects such as excessive whitespace and element collision,
yet remain ineffective for aspects that are difficult for current mod-
els to perceive (e.g., aspect ratio). Moreover, model-based rewards
exhibit signs of reward hacking. As shown in Table 2, the Visual
GPT-5-mini Reward variant performs worse than Verifiable Rewards
across all metrics, yet receives higher scores from GPT-5-mini (i.e.,
the reward model), while GPT-5.2 and human evaluation indicate
the opposite. This discrepancy highlights a key risk: while reward
hacking also occurs with verifiable metrics, it is typically diag-
nosable and correctable via iterative refinement (as discussed in
Section 5.1); in contrast, model-based rewards are more opaque,
often introducing systematic bias or optimization bottlenecks.
Limitations of VLM-based scoring. Table 2 further shows
that current VLMs are unreliable slide evaluators. GPT-5.2 assigns
overly high scores to its own generations despite clear defects
(e.g., distorted aspect ratios and element collisions), consistent with
preference leakage/bias observed in prior LLM-as-a-judge stud-
ies [10, 18, 26]. We further compare GPT-5.2 with human annota-
tors on the same samples and observe substantial discrepancies:
the agreement is low (Quadratic Weighted Kappa ≈0.19), and the
correlation is weak (Spearman ≈0.22). Notably, GPT-5.2 exhibits
a strong regression-to-the-mean tendency, assigning conservative
scores to a wide range of slides. This leads to two issues: (i) as an
evaluation metric, VLM-scores lack discriminative power, causing
distinct samples to receive similar or even inverted rankings; (ii) as a
reward signal for RL, they exhibit insufficient intra-group variance.
Empirically, in our experiments, with 𝐺= 8, approximately 30%
of rollout groups in the Visual GPT-5-mini Reward setting exhibit
zero reward variance and are thus discarded, whereas this ratio
is only 0.14% for Verifiable Rewards w/ GDPO. Combined with the
meta-evaluation in Table 1, the untraceable reward hacking risk
discussed above, and known perceptual blind spots in related stud-
ies [4, 25], these results suggest that current VLMs are inadequate
as evaluators or reward sources for slide generation.
Ablation
A.R.
E.W.
E.C.
V.I.
R.
Ent.
VLM
Base Model
36%
0.059
0.126
1.545
2.94
0.095
4.65
Full Method
85%
0.033
0.072
1.111
3.35
0.099
4.77
w/o A.R. Reward
39%
0.042
0.128
0.948
-
0.096
4.58
w/o E.W. Reward
84%
0.093
0.081
1.275
-
0.100
4.62
w/o E.C. Reward
77%
0.044
0.200
1.023
-
0.104
4.60
w/o V.I. Reward
86%
0.038
0.090
2.289
-
0.096
4.67
w/o KL Div.
95%
<0.01
0.041
0.235
3.89
0.072
4.72
w/o Shaping
84%
0.039
0.136
1.277
3.07
0.095
4.57
w/o GDPO
75%
0.032
0.087
1.071
3.25
0.098
4.73
w/o GDPO + Shaping
77%
0.068
0.144
0.963
3.21
0.105
4.56
Table 3: Ablation results. A.R.: Aspect ratio compliance un-
der tolerance of 5%; E.W.: excessive whitespace; E.C.: element
collision; V.I.: visual imbalance. R.: total reward; for w/o shap-
ing, the shaped reward is reported. Ent.: policy entropy.
6.3
Ablation Studies
To further validate the contribution of components in AeSlides, we
conduct additional ablation studies, with results reported in Table 3.
Ablation on reward components. We perform individual abla-
tions on all four reward components. As shown in the table, remov-
ing any single component leads to a significant degradation in its
corresponding metric. We also observe that certain metrics exhibit
synergistic effects during optimization; for instance, optimizing the
whitespace reward can indirectly improve visual imbalance.
Ablation on KL divergence. We remove the KL divergence
constraint and observe that the model attains seemingly high re-
wards. However, a sharp drop in policy entropy indicates that this
comes at the cost of a rapid collapse of the policy space. As training
progresses, the various design patterns learned during the SFT stage
are gradually abandoned, with only the most conservative ones
retained, causing the model to degenerate into a template-based
generation process. This behavior is clearly undesirable, indicating
that maintaining KL divergence is necessary for slide generation.
Relevant failure cases and analysis are provided in Appendix E.5.
Ablation on reward shaping and normalization. Both re-
ward shaping and reward-decoupled normalization (GDPO) facil-
itate continuous optimization across all reward components, pre-
venting the collapse of individual reward signals. Removing either
component causes the model to over-optimize certain rewards at
the expense of others, rather than achieving coordinated improve-
ment. Human evaluation results in Table 2 also cross-validate that
GDPO contributes positively to overall quality.
6.4
Case Studies
We present in Figure 3 four groups of queries and the corresponding
slides generated by four different models. A consistent observation
is that, due to the lack of explicit size supervision, distorted aspect
ratio emerges as the most prominent issue. Human annotators also
report that this factor has the largest impact on overall quality as-
sessment. Group 1 considers scenarios where two distinct types of
content must be presented within a single slide. AeSlides accurately
controls the proportion between the cards and the image, achieving
both compliance with aspect ratio constraints and a well-balanced
visual center. In contrast, other models fail to satisfy these two

[Page 8]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
GLM-4.7-
AeSlides
GPT-5.2
Claude-
Sonnet-4.5
DeepPresenter
Figure 3: Case studies of slides generated by: AeSlides, GPT-5.2, Claude-Sonnet-4.5, and DeepPresenter. Corresponding aesthetic
issues are presented on the right:
denotes distorted aspect ratio,
denotes excessive whitespace,
denotes element collision,
and
denotes visual imbalance. Slides with distorted aspect ratios are truncated to standard 16:9 for better visualization.
requirements simultaneously. Group 2 focuses on cases requiring
the presentation of multiple dimensions of information. AeSlides
adopts a flexible layout strategy, allocating space according to con-
tent quantity, resulting in well-aligned cards and efficient space
utilization. Other models either rely on simple two-column layouts
that exceed height constraints or attempt more complex layouts but
fail to distribute space properly, leading to excessive whitespace
and visual imbalance. Group 3 demonstrates AeSlides’ capability in
handling hierarchical text with appropriate content structuring and
trimming, along with effective icon usage. In comparison, GPT-5.2
introduces incorrect icons that lead to rendering misalignment and
subsequent element collisions. The remaining models fail to prop-
erly truncate and organize content, resulting in distorted aspect
ratio. Group 4 highlights a notable failure case of DeepPresenter.
Despite obvious issues such as severe height overflow and excessive
whitespace, the VLM-based evaluator fails to identify these prob-
lems and incorrectly considers the layout acceptable. This further
suggests that VLMs exhibit clear limitations in perceiving certain
aesthetic dimensions of slide design. Overall, the results show that
AeSlides effectively internalizes aesthetic criteria into model pa-
rameters, thereby mitigating the modality gap between text-based
generation and visually grounded evaluation.
7
Limitations and Future Work
In this paper, we focus on four categories of aesthetic layout issues
in slide generation. However, AeSlides-Reward-Bench also covers
additional quality factors beyond layout, including insufficient con-
tent density, mismatch with user intent, suboptimal color schemes,
and unsuitable image selection, etc. These aspects are not explicitly
modeled in our current framework and are left for future work.
Moreover, the element collision and visual imbalance metrics rely
on iterative refinement of heuristic rules. This dependence not only
incurs substantial engineering overhead but also limits scalability.
Future work should further investigate non-heuristic but verifiable
metrics, such as the vision-based whitespace detection introduced
in this paper. Finally, while the proposed aesthetic reward aligns
with majority preferences, it implicitly assumes a shared notion of
visual quality. In practice, aesthetic standards vary across cultures
and user groups, and a single reward formulation may not cap-
ture such diversity. Developing personalized or adaptive aesthetic
fine-tuning remains another important direction for future work.
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we conduct an investigation of the aesthetic defi-
ciencies in LLM-based slide generation, arising from the modality
gap between text-based generation and visually grounded evalua-
tion. We first introduce AeSlides-Reward-Bench, a dataset with
annotations over 21 categories of slide issues, and show that the
dominant failure modes stem from insufficient aesthetic layout ca-
pabilities of current models. To address this, we develop a suite
of verifiable metrics that target four major categories of aesthetic
layout issues. Meta-evaluations demonstrate that these metrics sig-
nificantly outperform VLM-based approaches in terms of accuracy,
efficiency, and cost. Building upon these metrics, we propose AeS-
lides, a reinforcement learning framework that fine-tunes LLMs
via verifiable aesthetic rewards, enabling the generation of slides
with visually coherent layouts. Extensive experiments show that,
with a limited amount of data, AeSlides substantially improves the
aesthetic quality of generated slides. It consistently outperforms
iterative reflection methods and model-based reward optimization
across all metrics and human evaluations, and even edges out propri-
etary systems such as Claude-Sonnet-4.5. Further analysis reveals
the unreliability of current VLMs in evaluating and supervising
slide generation, underscoring the importance of verifiable reward
design for improving aesthetic slide generation. Code, datasets, and
model are publicly released to facilitate future research.

[Page 9]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
References
[1] Isabel Cachola, Silviu Cucerzan, Allen Herring, Vuksan Mijovic, Erik Oveson, and
Sujay Kumar Jauhar. 2024. Knowledge-Centric Templatic Views of Documents.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024. 15460–
15476.
[2] Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. 2023. The Vendi Score: A Diversity
Evaluation Metric for Machine Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning
Research (2023).
[3] Tsu-Jui Fu, William Yang Wang, Daniel McDuff, and Yale Song. 2022. DOC2PPT:
Automatic Presentation Slides Generation from Scientific Documents. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 36. 634–642.
[4] Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan
Roth, Noah A Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. 2024. BLINK: Multimodal
Large Language Models Can See but Not Perceive. In European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 148–166.
[5] Chang Gao, Chujie Zheng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Kai Dang, Shixuan Liu, Bowen Yu,
An Yang, Shuai Bai, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Soft Adaptive Policy
Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20347 (2025).
[6] Jiaxin Ge, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Xuhui Zhou, Yi-Hao Peng, Sanjay Subramanian,
Qinyue Tan, Maarten Sap, Alane Suhr, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. 2025.
AutoPresent: Designing Structured Visuals from Scratch. In Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. 2902–2911.
[7] Wenyi Hong, Wenmeng Yu, Xiaotao Gu, Guo Wang, Guobing Gan, Haomiao Tang,
Jiale Cheng, Ji Qi, Junhui Ji, Lihang Pan, et al. 2025. GLM-4.5V and GLM-4.1V-
Thinking: Towards Versatile Multimodal Reasoning with Scalable Reinforcement
Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01006 (2025).
[8] Juyong Jiang, Chansung Park, Jiasi Shen, Sunghun Kim, Jianguo Li, Yue Wang,
et al. 2026. WebGen-R1: Incentivizing LLMs to Generate Functional and Aesthetic
Websites with Reinforcement Learning. (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?
id=Zzf6ExJZXj
[9] Kyudan Jung, Hojun Cho, Jooyeol Yun, Soyoung Yang, Jaehyeok Jang, and Jaegul
Choo. 2025. Talk to Your Slides: Language-Driven Agents for Efficient Slide
Editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11604 (2025).
[10] Dawei Li, Renliang Sun, Yue Huang, Ming Zhong, Bohan Jiang, Jiawei Han,
Xiangliang Zhang, Wei Wang, and Huan Liu. 2026. Preference Leakage: A Con-
tamination Problem in LLM-as-a-judge. In The Fourteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
[11] Xin Liang, Xiang Zhang, Yiwei Xu, Siqi Sun, and Chenyu You. 2025. SlideGen:
Collaborative Multimodal Agents for Scientific Slide Generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.04529 (2025).
[12] Shih-Yang Liu, Xin Dong, Ximing Lu, Shizhe Diao, Peter Belcak, Mingjie Liu,
Min-Hung Chen, Hongxu Yin, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Kwang-Ting Cheng, et al.
2026. GDPO: Group reward-Decoupled Normalization Policy Optimization for
Multi-reward RL Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05242 (2026).
[13] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang
Zhu. 2023. G-Eval: NLG Evaluation using GPT-4 with Better Human Alignment.
In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing. 2511–2522.
[14] Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du,
Wee Sun Lee, and Min Lin. 2025. Understanding R1-Zero-Like Training: A
Critical Perspective. In Second Conference on Language Modeling.
[15] Michael Luo, Sijun Tan, Roy Huang, Ameen Patel, Alpay Ariyak, Qingyang
Wu, Xiaoxiang Shi, Rachel Xin, Colin Cai, Maurice Weber, Ce Zhang,
Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2025.
DeepCoder: A
Fully Open-Source 14B Coder at O3-mini Level.
https://pretty-radio-
b75.notion.site/DeepCoder-A-Fully-Open-Source-14B-Coder-at-O3-mini-
Level-1cf81902c14680b3bee5eb349a512a51 Notion Blog.
[16] Wenhan Ma, Hailin Zhang, Liang Zhao, Yifan Song, Yudong Wang, Zhifang Sui,
and Fuli Luo. 2025. Stabilizing MoE Reinforcement Learning by Aligning Training
and Inference Routers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11370 (2025).
[17] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022.
Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 27730–27744.
[18] Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. LLM Evaluators
Recognize and Favor Their Own Generations. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 37 (2024), 68772–68802.
[19] Sohan Patnaik, Rishabh Jain, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Mausoom Sarkar. 2025.
AesthetiQ: Enhancing Graphic Layout Design via Aesthetic-Aware Preference
Alignment of Multi-modal Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. 23701–23711.
[20] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano
Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language
Model is Secretly a Reward Model. Advances in neural information processing
systems 36 (2023), 53728–53741.
[21] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei
Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing
the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300 (2024).
[22] Patrick E Shrout and Joseph L Fleiss. 1979. Intraclass Correlations: Uses in
Assessing Rater Reliability. Psychological bulletin 86, 2 (1979), 420.
[23] Wenxin Tang, Jingyu Xiao, Wenxuan Jiang, Xi Xiao, Yuhang Wang, Xuxin Tang,
Qing Li, Yuehe Ma, Junliang Liu, Shisong Tang, et al. 2025. SlideCoder: Layout-
Aware RAG-Enhanced Hierarchical Slide Generation from Design. In Proceedings
of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
9026–9050.
[24] Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, SH Cai, Yuan Cao, Y Charles,
HS Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, et al. 2026. Kimi K2. 5: Visual Agentic
Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02276 (2026).
[25] Shengbang Tong, Zhuang Liu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, Yann LeCun, and Saining
Xie. 2024. Eyes wide shut? exploring the visual shortcomings of multimodal
llms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 9568–9578.
[26] Koki Wataoka, Tsubasa Takahashi, and Ryokan Ri. 2024. Self-Preference Bias in
LLM-as-a-Judge. In NeurIPS Safe Generative AI Workshop 2024.
[27] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Rea-
soning in Large Language Models. Advances in neural information processing
systems 35 (2022), 24824–24837.
[28] Xiaojie Xu, Xinli Xu, Sirui Chen, Haoyu Chen, Fan Zhang, and Ying-Cong Chen.
2025. PreGenie: An Agentic Framework for High-quality Visual Presentation
Generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2025, Suzhou, China, November 4-9, 2025. 3045–3063.
[29] Hao Yang, Weijie Qiu, Ru Zhang, Zhou Fang, Ruichao Mao, Xiaoyu Lin, Maji
Huang, Zhaosong Huang, Teng Guo, Shuoyang Liu, et al. 2025. UI-UG: A Unified
MLLM for UI Understanding and Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24361
(2025).
[30] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-Agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces En-
able Automated Software Engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 37 (2024), 50528–50652.
[31] Feng Yao, Liyuan Liu, Dinghuai Zhang, Chengyu Dong, Jingbo Shang, and Jian-
feng Gao. 2025. Your Efficient RL Framework Secretly Brings You Off-Policy RL
Training. https://fengyao.notion.site/off-policy-rl
[32] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue,
Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. 2025. DAPO: An
Open-Source LLM Reinforcement Learning System at Scale. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
[33] Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Zhenyu Hou, Zhengxiao Du, Qinkai Zheng, Bin Chen, Da
Yin, Chendi Ge, Chengxing Xie, Cunxiang Wang, et al. 2026. GLM-5: from Vibe
Coding to Agentic Engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763 (2026).
[34] Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Qinkai Zheng, Zhenyu Hou, Bin Chen, Chengxing Xie,
Cunxiang Wang, Da Yin, Hao Zeng, Jiajie Zhang, et al. 2025. GLM-4.5: Agentic,
Reasoning, and Coding (ARC) Foundation Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06471
(2025).
[35] Xin Zhao, Yongkang Liu, Kuan Xu, Jia Guo, Zihao Wang, Yan Sun, Xinyu Kong,
Qianggang Cao, Liang Jiang, Zujie Wen, Zhiqiang Zhang, and Jun Zhou. 2025.
Small Leak Can Sink a Great Ship–Boost RL Training on MoE with IcePop!
https://ringtech.notion.site/icepop
[36] Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao,
Kai Dang, Yuqiong Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, et al. 2025. Group Sequence Policy
Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18071 (2025).
[37] Hao Zheng, Xinyan Guan, Hao Kong, Wenkai Zhang, Jia Zheng, Weixiang Zhou,
Hongyu Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2025. PPTAgent: Generating
and Evaluating Presentations Beyond Text-to-Slides. In Proceedings of the 2025
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. 14413–14429.
[38] Hao Zheng, Guozhao Mo, Xinru Yan, Qianhao Yuan, Wenkai Zhang, Xuanang
Chen, Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, and Le Sun. 2026. DeepPresenter:
Environment-Grounded Reflection for Agentic Presentation Generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.22839 (2026).
[39] Zilin Zhu, Chengxing Xie, Xin Lv, and slime Contributors. 2025. slime: An
LLM post-training framework for RL Scaling. https://github.com/THUDM/slime.
GitHub repository. Corresponding author: Xin Lv.
A
Metadata and Statistics of Datasets and Model
Checkpoints
A.1
AeSlides-Reward-Bench
A.1.1
Annotation Protocol. AeSlides-Reward-Bench is introduced
to provide meta-evaluation of diverse slide issues, beyond the four

[Page 10]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Metadata Field
Value
License
CC BY 4.0
Annotation Date
Dec. 2025
Annotator Count
6
Issue Category Count
4
Issue Subcategory Count
21
Total Annotation Effort (person-hours)
∼300
Record Count
2068
Paired Task Count
1029
Singleton Task Count
10
Query Length (min, median, mean, max)
16, 608, 3017.8, 42412
Preceding Slides Count (min, median, mean, max)
0, 4, 4.93, 24
Table 4: Metadata and statistics of AeSlides-Reward-Bench.
layout issues studied in this work. It covers four dimensions (Lay-
out, Vision, Element, and Content) with 21 subcategories. The corre-
sponding annotation criteria are listed in Table 5 (annotators are
provided with Chinese translations). We define three primary labels:
OK (no issue), Defect (issue present), and Not Applicable (e.g., no
relevant elements or dimensions excluded for special pages). For
certain cases, finer-grained labels are used (e.g., minor vs. severe
issue for excessive whitespace). The full label taxonomy is shown
in Table 6. During annotation, annotators are given: (i) the user
request and supporting context, (ii) preceding slides, and (iii) two
rollout candidates from the same query. They score each candidate
across all 21 dimensions and then provide an overall preference
indicating which candidate is superior in overall quality.
A.1.2
Statistics. Table 5 also reports the defect percentage for each
dimension. Additional metadata and statistics of the dataset are
summarized in Table 4.
A.1.3
Scope and Justification of Selected Layout Issues. Although
AeSlides-Reward-Bench annotates 21 issue dimensions, this work
focuses on four layout-related issues for two reasons. First, using
the annotated overall preference, we perform Bradley-Terry-style
modeling at the category level. For each subcategory, labels are
mapped to (−1, 0, 1), averaged within each category, and the dif-
ference between paired candidates is used as the relative strength
to fit the model, yielding ROC-AUC≈0.85. Among the four cate-
gories, layout issues contribute the most to overall preference, with
a weight of 4.43, compared to 2.49, 1.60, and 1.61 for Vision, Element,
and Content, respectively. This indicates that layout issues are cur-
rently the primary bottleneck. Second, we conduct a finer-grained
Bradley-Terry analysis over all 21 subcategories. Within the layout
category, L-4, L-6, and L-7 (corresponding to excessive whitespace,
visual imbalance, and element collision) exhibit the highest weights.
In addition, L-1 (distorted aspect ratio) has the highest defect per-
centage. We therefore select these four dimensions as the main
focus of this study. Based on these findings, we target slide quality
improvement through these four layout aesthetic dimensions, while
leaving the remaining dimensions as future work.
A.2
AeSlides-7k
A.2.1
Statistics. To enable reinforcement learning to internalize
aesthetic criteria, we further construct the AeSlides-7k dataset,
Figure 4: Distribution of filtered structurally simple pages in
AeSlides-7k.
Figure 5: Distribution of languages in AeSlides-7k.
Figure 6: Distribution of page indices in AeSlides-7k.
which serves as the prefix prompts during the rollout stage of rein-
forcement learning. Table 7 summarizes its metadata and statistics.
As described in the main paper, we filter out most structurally sim-
ple pages (e.g., cover pages, tables of contents, dividers, and ending
pages). The proportions of filtered page types are visualized in Fig-
ure 4. We also analyze the multilingual distribution of AeSlides-7k,
which covers at least 5 languages, including English, Chinese, Ara-
bic, Thai, Cyrillic. The language distribution is shown in Figure 5.
In addition, we report the distributions of page indices within each
query, prompt token counts, and visible text word clouds, which
are visualized in Figure 6, Figure 7, and Figure 8, respectively.

[Page 11]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Category
Subcategory
Description
# Labels
Defect %
Layout
[L-1] Distorted Aspect Ratio
Compared to the standard 16:9 aspect ratio, the aspect ratio is excessively wide or narrow.
3
56.0
[L-2] Missing Centering
Elements that should be centered (e.g., the main title) are not centered.
4
12.5
[L-3] Misalignment
Elements that should be aligned (e.g., peer-level cards) are not properly aligned.
4
6.0
[L-4] Excessive Whitespace
Large areas of empty space exist on the page, resulting in a visually hollow appearance.
4
46.5
[L-5] Content Overcrowding
Content is overly crowded or consists entirely of dense text, making it difficult to read.
3
0.9
[L-6] Visual Imbalance
Poor layout structure, with unbalanced spacing and disharmonious density distribution.
3
25.0
[L-7] Element Collision
Elements overlap, overflow their parent container, or exceed slide boundaries.
2
13.9
Vision
[V-1] Low Contrast
Color contrast is too weak, making text difficult to read.
3
1.4
[V-2] Jarring Contrast
Color contrast is too strong, appearing harsh or visually unappealing.
2
5.4
[V-3] Cluttered Color Scheme
Too many colors are used, resulting in a cluttered and chaotic presentation.
2
3.2
[V-4] Inconsistent Style
The color scheme of the current page differs significantly from previous pages.
2
1.3
[V-5] Lack of Style
Insufficient styling, such as missing hierarchy or lack of typographic structure in large blocks.
2
0.1
Element
[E-1] Irrational Image Size
Image sizes are inappropriate, leading to poor arrangement or an overall unattractive layout.
3
16.5
[E-2] Irrational Image Content
Image content is inappropriate, either inconsistent with the theme or visually unappealing.
4
80.8
[E-3] Poor Image Cropping
Image cropping is improper.
3
4.5
[E-4] Poor Vector Graphics
Vector graphics or geometric elements are poorly constructed, resulting in poor visual quality.
3
8.3
[E-5] Poor Charts/Tables
Tables/charts exhibit misalignment, structural errors, or excessive length.
3
4.0
[E-6] Inappropriate Font Size
Such as children significantly larger than parents, or inconsistent sizes among peers.
5
4.3
[E-7] Missing Icons
Icons are missing, misaligned, or occupy unnecessary space.
2
4.5
Content
[C-1] Irrelevant Content
The generated page content does not match user requirements.
2
0.1
[C-2] Low Information Density
The page contains too little content, resulting in a sparse layout.
3
1.4
Overall Preference (Pairwise)
Overall preference between two different slide pages generated from the same query.
3
-
Table 5: The annotation criteria of AeSlides-Reward-Bench span four dimensions (Layout, Vision, Element, and Content) with
21 subcategories. Detailed labels are listed in Table 6.
Subcategory
Labels
[L-1] Distorted Aspect Ratio
Excessive aspect ratio; Insufficient aspect ratio; No issue.
[L-2] Missing Centering
Severe issue; Minor issue; Proper centering; Not applicable.
[L-3] Misalignment
Severe issue; Minor issue; Proper alignment; Not applicable.
[L-4] Excessive Whitespace
Severe issue; Minor issue; No issue; Not applicable.
[L-5] Content Overcrowding
Overcrowding; No issue; Not applicable.
[L-6] Visual Imbalance
Imbalance; No issue; Not applicable.
[L-7] Element Collision
Element collision; No issue.
[V-1] Low Contrast
Globally low contrast; Locally low contrast; No issue.
[V-2] Jarring Contrast
Excessive contrast; No issue.
[V-3] Cluttered Color Scheme
Cluttered color scheme; No issue.
[V-4] Inconsistent Style
Style inconsistency; No issue.
[V-5] Lack of Style
Lack of stylistic coherence; No issue.
[E-1] Irrational Image Size
Improper image sizing; Proper image sizing; Not applicable.
[E-2] Irrational Image Content
Inappropriate background image; Inappropriate illustrative image; Proper image usage; Not applicable.
[E-3] Poor Image Cropping
Poor image cropping; Proper image cropping; Not applicable.
[E-4] Poor Vector Graphics
Poor vector graphic quality; Proper vector graphic usage; Not applicable.
[E-5] Poor Charts/Tables
Poor chart/table quality; Proper chart/table usage; Not applicable.
[E-6] Inappropriate Font Size
Child font larger than parent; Inconsistent sibling font sizes; Overall font too small; Title font excessively large; Proper font size.
[E-7] Missing Icons
Missing icons; No issue.
[C-1] Irrelevant Content
Content mismatch; No issue.
[C-2] Low Information Density
Low information density; No issue; Not applicable.
Table 6: The label taxonomy across dimensions in AeSlides-Reward-Bench: Green indicates OK, Red indicates Defect, and
Black denotes Not Applicable.
A.2.2
Case. We present a concrete example in Figure 23 to illus-
trate the formulation of prefix-conditioned slide generation used in
the main paper. Specifically, the prefix prompt already contains all
necessary supporting context, including external information re-
trieval, image search, user intent clarification, high-level planning,
etc. During the reinforcement learning stage, the model gener-
ates the next slide conditioned on this prefix (highlighted in red),
enabling clearer disentanglement and attribution of its aesthetic
capabilities.

[Page 12]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Metadata Field
Value
Sample Count (total)
8471
Filtered Special Sample Count
1735
Sample Count (train, eval)
5704, 1032
Prompt Tokens (min, median, mean, max)
8k, 22k, 21k, 30k
Input Messages Count (min, median, mean, max)
6, 24, 27, 84
Language Count
>5
Table 7: Metadata and statistics of AeSlides-7k.
Figure 7: Distribution of prefix token counts in AeSlides-7k.
Figure 8: Word cloud of visible text in AeSlides-7k.
A.3
GLM-AeSlides
Metadata and statistics of the GLM-AeSlides checkpoints are sum-
marized in Table 8.
B
Details of Cost and Efficiency Analysis
To estimate the cost of VLM-based evaluation, we sampled approxi-
mately 100 prompts from the training set, used a base model (GLM-
4.7-Flash) to generate one round of responses, and then submitted
the outputs to the VLM for evaluation. Under our setup, each sample
consumes roughly 2k prompt tokens (dominated by the rendered
slide image tokens; this value is obtained from response.usage
and thus already accounts for the multiplier mechanism of GPT-5-
nano and GPT-5-mini) and 40 completion tokens. Pricing is based
Metadata Field
Value
License
CC BY 4.0
Base Model
GLM-4.7-Flasha
Total Parameter Count
29.94B
Activated Parameter Count
3.90B
Training Prompt Count
5.7K
Training Sample Count
46K
a: https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-4.7-Flash
Table 8: Metadata and statistics of GLM-AeSlides checkpoint.
on the official documentation1. The estimated cost for 50k samples
is ∼$200, ∼$30, and ∼$6 for GPT-5.2, GPT-5-mini, and GPT-5-nano,
respectively. When only an overall score is generated (as in our
main experiments for VLM-based rewarding and evaluation), the
number of prompt tokens slightly increases while completion to-
kens decrease; however, since vision input remains the dominant
factor, the overall cost does not change substantially.
For efficiency, we measure the end-to-end latency of both the
proposed verifiable metrics and VLM-based evaluation. VLM mea-
surements are averaged over three separate time intervals to ensure
robustness against temporal fluctuations. Both methods are inte-
grated with the rendering infrastructure, and thus include a fixed
rendering latency of approximately ∼3000 ms to ensure stable page
rendering. Beyond this, verifiable metrics incur only lightweight
metric computation and minimal JavaScript injection overhead (in
total about ∼1000 ms). In contrast, VLM-based evaluation intro-
duces significantly higher latency due to network transmission,
remote request queuing, and server-side model inference.
C
Prompts
C.1
Prompt for VLM-Based Issue Detection
The prompt for VLM-based issue detection is shown in Figure 25.
For readability, we apply necessary simplifications based on the
original chat template (the same applies hereafter).
C.2
Prompt for VLM Rewarding and Overall
Scoring
The prompt for VLM-based overall aesthetic evaluation is shown
in Figure 24. Its static counterpart follows a similar structure, but
replaces the rendered slide screenshot with the HTML source code
of the slide, with corresponding adjustments to the prompt.
D
Theoretical Justification of Reward Signal
Collapse in Multi-Reward Optimization
In this section, we provide a brief theoretical justification for the
reward collapse phenomenon in multi-reward reinforcement learn-
ing. In particular, GDPO [12] identifies one form of reward collapse
under discretized rewards: different reward combinations may map
to only a few distinct advantage values after summation and nor-
malization (e.g., (2, 0) and (1, 1) yielding the same total reward),
which compresses reward composition information and weakens
the optimization signal of certain components. In this work, we
1https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/models , accessed March 2026

[Page 13]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=1
Corr=0.460
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=1.5
Corr=0.612
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=2
Corr=0.743
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=3
Corr=0.846
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=4
Corr=0.906
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=6
Corr=0.950
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=8
Corr=0.974
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=12
Corr=0.988
2
0
2
z_dom
2
1
0
1
2
A
std scale=16
Corr=0.993
Figure 9: Scatter plot of the normalized advantage against the dominant standard deviation in Monte Carlo simulations.
present an alternative perspective by analyzing reward collapse
in the general setting of continuous rewards through the variance
scale across reward components.
We first revisit the advantage estimation in standard GRPO.
Given a group of size 𝐺, the model produces rollouts 𝑦1, . . . ,𝑦𝐺. As-
sume there are 𝐾reward components, and denote the 𝑘-th reward
component of sample 𝑗by 𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
. Standard GRPO first aggregates the
reward components,
𝑅𝑗=
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
,
(13)
and then applies group-wise normalization,
𝐴𝑗= 𝑅𝑗−¯𝑅
ˆ𝜎𝑅
,
¯𝑅:= 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑅𝑗,
ˆ𝜎2
𝑅:= 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
(𝑅𝑗−¯𝑅)2. (14)
For each reward component, define the within-group sample
mean and sample standard deviation as
¯𝑟(𝑘) := 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
,
ˆ𝜎2
𝑘:= 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1

𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(𝑘)2
.
(15)
Using
1
𝐺−1 instead of 1
𝐺would only change a constant factor and
does not affect the conclusion, and is thus omitted for simplicity.
Since ¯𝑅= Í𝐾
𝑘=1 ¯𝑟(𝑘), we have the exact finite-group decomposition
𝐴𝑗=
Í𝐾
𝑘=1

𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(𝑘)
ˆ𝜎𝑅
=
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
ˆ𝜎𝑘
ˆ𝜎𝑅
·
𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(𝑘)
ˆ𝜎𝑘
=
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑤𝑘𝑧(𝑘)
𝑗
, (16)
where
𝑤𝑘:= ˆ𝜎𝑘
ˆ𝜎𝑅
,
𝑧(𝑘)
𝑗
:=
𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(𝑘)
ˆ𝜎𝑘
.
(17)
By construction, each 𝑧(𝑘)
𝑗
has zero within-group sample mean
and unit within-group sample variance. Therefore, standard GRPO
does not combine reward components equally after aggregation;
instead, it forms a variance-weighted mixture of the per-component
normalized signals, with weights determined by the within-group
sample scales 𝑤𝑘.
To further interpret these weights, note that
ˆ𝜎2
𝑅=
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
ˆ𝜎2
𝑘+ 2
∑︁
1≤𝑘<ℓ≤𝐾
ˆ𝑐𝑘ℓ,
(18)
where
ˆ𝑐𝑘ℓ:= 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1

𝑟(𝑘)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(𝑘) 
𝑟(ℓ)
𝑗
−¯𝑟(ℓ)
(19)
is the within-group sample covariance between reward components
𝑘and ℓ. Under the assumption that the population cross-component
covariances are near zero, these sample covariance terms fluctuate
around zero and are typically small relative to the variance terms
for moderate 𝐺. In that case,
ˆ𝜎2
𝑅≈
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
ˆ𝜎2
𝑘,
𝑤𝑘≈
ˆ𝜎𝑘
√︃Í𝐾
ℓ=1 ˆ𝜎2
ℓ
.
(20)
Now suppose one reward component has a much larger variance
scale than the others:
ˆ𝜎2
𝑚≫
∑︁
𝑘≠𝑚
ˆ𝜎2
𝑘,
(21)
and the sample covariance terms are not dominant. Then
𝑤𝑚≈1,
𝑤𝑘≈ˆ𝜎𝑘
ˆ𝜎𝑚
≪1
(𝑘≠𝑚),
(22)
so that
𝐴𝑗= 𝑤𝑚𝑧(𝑚)
𝑗
+
∑︁
𝑘≠𝑚
𝑤𝑘𝑧(𝑘)
𝑗
≈𝑧(𝑚)
𝑗
.
(23)
In this regime, the normalized advantage is dominated by the high-
variance component, while the contributions of the remaining com-
ponents are strongly attenuated. Consequently, the policy update is
driven primarily by the dominant component, and the optimization
signals from the other components effectively collapse. A practical
remedy is to align reward scales through reward reweighting or
reward shaping. Another solution is to apply GDPO-style reward-
decoupled normalization. In this work, we employ both, and the
ablation studies in the main paper support this design choice.
100
101
Dominant component std scale
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation
Correlation between normalized advantage and dominant component
K=4, G=8
Corr(A, z_dom), flattened
Mean group-wise Corr(A, z_dom)
Figure 10: Correlation between the normalized advantage and
the dominant standard deviation in Monte Carlo simulations.
We further conduct Monte Carlo simulations to visualize this
phenomenon. Under our experimental setup (𝐾= 4,𝐺= 8), we
fix the scales of the non-dominant reward components and vary
the standard deviation of one component. We then compute the
correlation between the resulting normalized advantage and the

[Page 14]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
normalized signal 𝑧(𝑚) of the dominant component (Figure 10),
together with the corresponding scatter plots (Figure 9). The results
show that when the standard deviation of one component becomes
roughly 3x larger than those of the others, it already dominates the
optimization process. As this ratio further increases, the normalized
advantage becomes nearly a linear function of that component.
E
Additional Experimental Setup, Results and
Analysis
E.1
Details of Experimental Setup
We provide additional details of the experimental setup in Table 9.
Hyperparameter
Value
Training & Rollout
Hardware
8×H100 GPUs
Num. Train Samples
5704
Epoch
1
Num. Rollouts
356
Rollout Batch Size
16
Num. Samples per Prompt (Group Size)
8
Rollout Max Response Length
8192
Rollout Temperature
1
KL Loss Coefficient
0.1
KL Loss Type
low_var_kl
𝜀low
0.2
𝜀high
0.28
Learning Rate
1e-6
Weight Decay
0.1
Adam Beta1
0.9
Adam Beta2
0.98
Evaluation
Num. Eval Samples
1032
Eval Temperature
0.6
Eval Top-P
0.95
Render Infrastructure & Verifiable Metrics
Hardware
20×24c48g CPU nodes
A.R. 𝛼
16.0
A.R. 𝛽
64.0
A.R. margin 𝑚
0.04
E.W. Gaussian Kernel
(21×21)
E.W. Box Kernel
(201×151)
E.W. 𝑇clip
50.0
E.W. 𝜏
0.05
E.W. Clip Threshold (Lower & Upper)
[0.8, 0.995]
E.C. Clip Threshold (Lower & Upper)
[0.5, 0.998]
V.I. Clip Threshold (Lower & Upper)
[0.1, 0.95]
Table 9: Additional details of the experimental setup.
E.2
Training Dynamics
We further provide additional visualizations to analyze the training
dynamics of AeSlides. As shown in Figure 11, AeSlides achieves
a steady increase in total reward on both the training and evalua-
tion sets. Figures 12 and 13 present the evolution of KL divergence
and policy entropy during training for both the full method and
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Step
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
Total Reward
Total Reward Training Dynamics
Rollout
Eval
Figure 11: Reward dynamics during AeSlides training.
(smoothed with a rolling window of size 30; mean ± std)
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Step
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
KL Divergence
KL Divergence Training Dynamics
Main
w/o KL
Figure 12: KL divergence dynamics during AeSlides training,
compared with w/o KL Div. ablation variant. (smoothed with
a rolling window of size 30; mean ± std)
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Step
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
Entropy
Entropy Training Dynamics
Main
w/o KL
Figure 13: Entropy dynamics during AeSlides training, com-
pared with w/o KL Div. ablation variant. (smoothed with a
rolling window of size 30; mean ± std)
the w/o KL Div. ablation variant. Without the KL constraint, the
updates become overly aggressive, leading to a rapid increase in KL
divergence. This is accompanied by a collapse of the policy space:
the model converges to overly stable and conservative design pat-
terns, discarding the diverse patterns learned during the SFT stage.
Although such behavior can yield higher reward, it deviates from
the intended objective of generating high-quality slides (see also
the case study in E.5). Figure 14 compares the rollout time of AeS-
lides and the VLM-based reward model (Visual GPT-5-mini). The

[Page 15]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Step
100
150
200
250
300
Rollout Time
Rollout Time during Training
Verifiable Rewards
VLM Reward (Visual GPT-5-mini)
Figure 14: Rollout time during AeSlides training. (smoothed
with a rolling window of size 50; mean ± std)
reported time corresponds to the total wall-clock time for rollout
generation, including both decoding and reward computation.
E.3
Additional Details of Human Evaluation
To further conduct a more in-depth analysis of human evaluation
results, we compute additional statistical metrics and provide cor-
responding visualizations, as presented below.
Significance of performance improvements with AeSlides.
We conduct a paired, sample-level statistical evaluation to deter-
mine whether AeSlides exhibits statistically significant performance
improvements over competing variants. Over all evaluation sam-
ples, we compute per-sample score differences (AeSlides - competi-
tor). We further estimate the uncertainty via bootstrap-based 95%
confidence intervals, as shown in Figure 16. To assess statistical
significance, we perform the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and the
paired t-test, with Holm correction applied for multiple compar-
isons. The Wilcoxon test shows that AeSlides achieves statistically
significant improvements over all compared models except Claude-
Sonnet-4.5 (Holm-adjusted 𝑝= 0.067, which is slightly above 0.05).
Consistently, as illustrated in Figure 16, the bootstrap confidence
intervals lie entirely above zero for all variants except Claude-
Sonnet-4.5, whose interval slightly overlaps zero. The paired t-test,
in contrast, indicates statistically significant improvements for all
variants. Overall, AeSlides shows consistent improvements across
all variants, with statistically significant gains over most baselines
under non-parametric testing, and competitive performance com-
pared to the proprietary model Claude-Sonnet-4.5.
Agreement between human evaluation and VLM scores.
We plot the Bland-Altman diagram between human evaluation
scores and GPT-5.2 scores under a unified scoring protocol, as
shown in Figure 17. The plot indicates that GPT-5.2 systematically
overestimates scores relative to human judgments, with wide lim-
its of agreement, suggesting weak consistency. In addition, clear
heteroscedasticity is observed (i.e., a regression-to-the-mean ten-
dency). Together with the statistical metrics reported in the main
paper (Spearman 0.22, QWK 0.19), these results further confirm
that current VLM scores are largely unreliable and unsuitable for
rewarding and evaluation in slide generation tasks.
E.4
Additional Experimental Results
To further illustrate comparative model performance and mitigate
potential inter-sample scale inconsistency in human evaluation,
we additionally visualize pairwise win rates based on per-sample
human evaluation scores, as shown in Figure 15 (under three dif-
ferent definitions of win rate). Furthermore, we fit a Bradley-Terry
model to the pairwise preference data, yielding the BT scores pre-
sented in Figure 18. Both figures indicate that AeSlides consistently
outperforms all variants.
E.5
Failure Cases of KL Ablation
We present a series of outputs from the w/o KL Div. ablation variant
in Figure 19. As observed, removing the KL divergence during re-
inforcement learning leads the model to adopt a highly templated
design pattern and rapidly collapse its policy space, discarding other
diverse but error-prone patterns acquired during the SFT stage. This
behavior is undesirable. Our objective is for the model to retain
previously learned design patterns and perform fine-grained adjust-
ments to HTML attributes so as to better satisfy aesthetic criteria.
Based on this observation, we retain the KL divergence regulariza-
tion term to constrain policy updates. We also explored alternative
training and evaluation strategies. In particular, we examined the
Vendi Score [2] used in DeepPresenter [38], which measures diver-
sity via the eigenvalue entropy of feature similarity matrices ex-
tracted by DINOv2. However, under our prefix-conditioned setting,
this metric fails to provide a reliable estimate of diversity. Instead,
it tends to reward behaviors that deviate from user instructions,
the style of preceding slides, and the reasoning chain-of-thought,
which is undesirable. Therefore, we do not adopt this metric for
training or evaluation in this work, and leave the design of more
effective diversity metrics for future work.
E.6
Failure Cases of AeSlides
We also observe that, despite being trained with explicit aesthetic
supervision, AeSlides may still exhibit certain failure modes at infer-
ence time. Based on feedback from human annotators, we collect a
subset of representative failure cases and present them in Figure 20.
The main patterns are summarized as follows. (i) Overly strong con-
ditions specified in the user query or the model-generated plan. For
example, when the user explicitly requires displaying all content
on each slide while the total content volume is excessive, the model
struggles to simultaneously satisfy the instruction and maintain a
balanced aspect ratio. Similar issues arise when the content is too
sparse, leading to excessive whitespace. We attribute such failures
primarily to limitations in the user query itself or the planning stage
in the prefix condition, rather than to deficiencies in the model’s
aesthetic capability. (ii) Fine-grained aesthetic attributes that are
not explicitly supervised, such as typography (e.g., font family and
size) and color schemes. These issues occur relatively infrequently
in practice and are more difficult to evaluate reliably. Therefore,
this work primarily focuses on higher-level layout aesthetics. Nev-
ertheless, AeSlides is an extensible framework: if verifiable metrics
for these dimensions become available, they can be seamlessly
incorporated into the framework, which we leave as future work.

[Page 16]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Figure 15: Pairwise win rates of all variants based on human evaluation scores. Left: strict win rate; Center: win rate that exclude
ties; Right: Ties contributed as 0.5 wins.
Figure 16: Mean score differences between AeSlides and other
variants with bootstrap confidence intervals for statistical
significance analysis.
Figure 17: Agreement (Bland-Altman Plot) between human
evaluation scores and VLM scores.
E.7
End-to-End Case Study of AeSlides
To further demonstrate that single-page-level aesthetic supervision
does not compromise slide-deck-level generation quality, we con-
duct additional end-to-end generation experiments. Representative
cases are shown in Figures 21 and 22. The results indicate that, while
achieving improved aesthetic quality, the model maintains strong
content quality and consistent cross-slide stylistic coherence.
Figure 18: Bradley-Terry model scores of all variants.

[Page 17]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Figure 19: Failure cases of KL ablation. The generated slides collapse into a limited space of conservative design patterns.
Figure 20: Failure cases of AeSlides.

[Page 18]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Figure 21: End-to-end generation case of AeSlides (i). (User query: Create PPT from this: <uploaded document about XXXXX
Platform>)
Figure 22: End-to-end generation case of AeSlides (ii). (User query (Chinese translated into English): Create a PPT to introduce
and appreciate the painting "Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains" for students to appreciate in art class. The content should
include: introduction of the artist, background, techniques (composition, color, characters, lines, etc.), significance, etc. The content
should be rich and detailed. The PPT layout should be standard size (1280×720 pixels), and the PPT background and style should
match the painting.)

[Page 19]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
AeSlides-7k Case
<system>
You are GLM-AeSlides, an AI assistant designed to help users create professional slides......
<user>
Create a slide deck about Endolymphatic hydrops imaging
<assistant>
<think> The user is asking about "Endolymphatic hydrops imaging." This appears to be a medical imaging topic related to
endolymphatic hydrops, which is a condition affecting the inner ear. To provide comprehensive information, I should:\n\n1. First
understand what endolymphatic hydrops is - itś typically associated with Ménièreś disease and involves abnormal....... </think>
I’ll search for information about endolymphatic hydrops imaging techniques......
<tool> {’name’: ’search’, ’arguments’: {’queries’: [’endolymphatic hydrops imaging techniques’, ’MRI for endolymphatic hydrops
diagnosis’, "imaging modalities for Ménière’s disease", ’advances in endolymphatic hydrops imaging’]}} </tool>
Output: 1. Consensus on MR Imaging of Endolymphatic Hydrops in https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9096015......
<think> Based on the search results, I can see that there are several important articles about endolymphatic hydrops imaging. The
most recent and comprehensive information appears to be in the consensus document from 2022, which would provide standardized
approaches to imaging. There are also articles discussing specific MRI techniques, including both contrast-enhanced and non-contrast
methods.\n\nKey points I’ve noticed from the search results......</think>
I’ll visit the consensus document on MR imaging of endolymphatic hydrops to get the most comprehensive and up-to-date
information on imaging techniques.
......
<think> I have successfully gathered comprehensive information about endolymphatic hydrops imaging and found some relevant
MRI images. Now I should create a presentation that covers:\n\n1. Introduction to Endolymphatic Hydrops and Meniereś Disease\n2.
Imaging Techniques:\n - Contrast-enhanced MRI (3D-FLAIR and 3D-real IR sequences)\n - Contrast administration methods
(intratympanic vs. intravenous)\n - Non-contrast MRI techniques\n3. Grading Systems (Baráth and Bernaerts)\n4. Clinical
Applications and Diagnostic Accuracy\n5. Recent Advances and Future Directions\n\nI should plan the slides to be comprehen-
sive yet concise, with a focus on the key imaging techniques, grading systems, and clinical applications. The presentation...... </think>
<tool>
{’name’:
’initialize_design’,
’arguments’:
{’title’:
’Endolymphatic
Hydrops
Imaging’,
’slide_name’:
’endolym-
phatic_hydrops_imaging’}} </tool>
<think> The presentation has been successfully initialized. Now I need to create each of the 9 slides according to the plan......
</think> I’ll now create the first slide - the title slide for the presentation.
<tool> {’name’: ’insert_page’, ’arguments’: {’index’: 1, ’html’: ’<!DOCTYPE html>\n<html lang="en">\n<head>\n<meta charset="utf-
8"/>\n......’}} </tool>
<think> Great! The title slide has been created successfully. Now I need to create the second slide about the introduction to
endolymphatic hydrops and Meniere’s disease. </think> Now I’ll create the second slide introducing endolymphatic hydrops and
Meniere’s disease.
<tool> {’name’: ’insert_page’, ’arguments’: {’index’: 2, ’html’: ’<!DOCTYPE html>\n<html lang="en">\n<head>\n<meta charset="utf-
8"/>\n......’}} </tool>
Figure 23: Case of prefix-conditioned generation prompt in AeSlides-7k. The Red part indicates the rollout generation. For
readability, we apply necessary simplifications to the original chat template.

[Page 20]
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Pan et al.
Slide Layout Aesthetic Evaluation Prompt
You are a Visual QA Assistant specializing in Slide Layout.
Your task is to evaluate the overall layout aesthetics of a slide screenshot.
Core Evaluation Dimensions (must be jointly considered):
1. distorted_aspect_ratio:
The slide should follow a 16:9 ratio (1280x720). Treat width/height ratios within +/-5% of 16:9 (roughly 1.69 to 1.87) as acceptable.
Deviations or visual distortion should be considered a flaw.
2. excessive_whitespace:
Identify empty regions without semantic content.
Note: Background fills (gradients, textures) do NOT count as content.
3. element_collision:
Check for overlap, occlusion, overflow, clipping, or boundary violations between elements.
4. visual_imbalance:
Evaluate whether the layout is visually balanced or biased toward one side.
Evaluation Criteria:
Judge the slide holistically as a visual composition. Consider layout balance, alignment, spacing, hierarchy, readability, proportional
sizing, whitespace distribution, and visual grouping.
Strongly penalize:
- Incorrect or visually distorted aspect ratio
- Large meaningless empty regions (even if visually filled)
- Element collisions (overlap, occlusion, overflow, clipping)
- Strong visual imbalance (content heavily biased to one side)
- Other obvious layout flaws that make the slide look broken, chaotic, empty, or unprofessional
Do NOT penalize:
- Intentional minimalism or clean negative space when it supports clarity
- Minor alignment imperfections that do not affect perception
Scoring Rubric (0–5):
- 0: Broken layout. Severe issues in ≥2 core dimensions. Unusable.
- 1: Major failure. At least one severe issue OR multiple clear issues.
- 2: Weak layout. Noticeable issues in ≥2 dimensions. Feels unpolished.
- 3: Mixed quality. One clear issue OR multiple mild issues. Usable but lacks refinement.
- 4: Strong layout. Most dimensions well-controlled with minor imperfections.
- 5: Excellent layout. All four dimensions well-balanced. Cohesive and presentation-ready.
Output only the final answer between <ans> and </ans>.
For example: <ans>3</ans>
Input:
{Slide Screenshot}
Figure 24: Prompt for VLM-based slide aesthetic overall evaluation.

[Page 21]
AeSlides: Incentivizing Aesthetic Layout in LLM-Based Slide Generation via Verifiable Rewards
Preprint, Under Review, April 2026
Slide Issue Detection Prompt
You are a Visual QA Assistant specializing in slide layout defect detection.
Your task is to judge whether a slide screenshot has any obvious layout problems in exactly these categories:
1. has_distorted_aspect_ratio:
The standard slide aspect ratio is 16:9 (1280x720).
Treat width/height ratios within +/-5% of 16:9 (roughly 1.69 to 1.87) as acceptable. Outside that tolerance, or when the slide visibly
appears stretched, squashed, or improperly scaled, it should be treated as a significant aspect-ratio defect.
2. has_excessive_whitespace:
There are abnormally large regions without semantic content.
Note: Background fills (gradients, textures, color blocks) DO NOT count as content.
3. has_element_collision:
Elements visibly overlap, occlude each other, overflow containers, or extend beyond boundaries.
Do NOT flag minor or visually harmless overlays (e.g., subtle badges, light decorations).
4. has_visual_imbalance:
The visual center of gravity is clearly biased to one side (left/right/top/bottom), making the layout feel unstable or uncomfortable.
Judging Rules:
- Only flag obvious and visually significant issues
- Do NOT flag minor imperfections
- Do NOT penalize intentional clean layouts unless clearly problematic
Output the final answer between <ans> and </ans>. Return a JSON object with exactly these keys:
{
"has_distorted_aspect_ratio":
true | false,
"has_excessive_whitespace":
true | false,
"has_element_collision":
true | false,
"has_visual_imbalance":
true | false
}
For example:
<ans>{
"has_distorted_aspect_ratio":
false,
"has_excessive_whitespace":
true,
"has_element_collision":
false,
"has_visual_imbalance":
true
}</ans>
Input:
{Slide Screenshot}
Figure 25: Prompt for VLM-based slide aesthetic issue detection.