[Page 1]
Quantum Knowledge Graph: Modeling Context-Dependent
Triplet Validity
Yao WANG1,2
Zixu GENG3
Jun YAN1∗
1HKAI-Sci, City University of Hong Kong
2Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3Pratt School of Engineering, Duke University
ywan75@cityu.edu.hk, zg73@duke.edu, yan.jun@cityu.hk
April 28, 2026
Abstract
Knowledge graphs (KGs) are increasingly used to support large language model (LLM)
reasoning, but standard triplet-based KGs treat each relation as globally valid. In many
settings, whether a relation should count as evidence depends on the context. We therefore
formulate triplet validity as a triplet-specific function of context and refer to this formulation
as a Quantum Knowledge Graph (QKG).
We instantiate QKG in medicine using a diabetes-centered PrimeKG subgraph, whose
68,651 context-sensitive relations are further annotated with patient-group-specific constraints.
We evaluate it in a reasoner–validator pipeline for medical question answering on a KG-
grounded subset of MedReason containing 2,788 questions. With Haiku-4.5 as both the
Reasoner and the Validator, KG-backed validation significantly improves over a no-validator
baseline (+0.61 pp), and QKG with context matching yields the largest gain, outperforming
both KG validation without context matching (+0.79 pp) and the no-validator baseline
(+1.40 pp; paired McNemar, all p < 0.05). Under a stronger validator (Qwen-3.6-Plus),
the raw QKG gain over the no-validator baseline grows from +1.40 pp to +5.96 pp; the
context-matching gap is non-significant (p = 0.73) on the raw set but becomes borderline
significant (p = 0.05) after adjustment for knowledge leakage and suspicious questions,
consistent with a benchmark-gold ceiling rather than a QKG limitation.
Taken together, the results support the view that the value of a KG in LLM-based clinical
reasoning lies not merely in storing medically related facts, but in representing whether those
facts are applicable to the specific patient context. For reproducibility and further research,
we release the curated QKG datasets and source code.1
Keywords: Quantum Knowledge Graph, context-dependent triplet validity, applicability
conditions, reasoner–validator pipeline, patient-context reasoning
∗Corresponding author.
1https://github.com/HKAI-Sci/QKG
1
arXiv:2604.23972v1  [cs.CL]  27 Apr 2026

[Page 2]
Working Draft
2
Graphical abstract. Context-dependent triplet validity in a Quantum Knowledge Graph.

[Page 3]
Working Draft
3
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) and knowledge graphs (KGs) are increasingly being developed as
complementary components rather than competing paradigms. Recent work has shown that KGs
can improve LLM systems by providing structured, explicit, and verifiable knowledge for retrieval,
reasoning, and trustworthiness, while LLMs can in turn assist the construction, enrichment, and
operational use of KGs (Sui et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025b; Parović et al., 2025). This emerging
interplay suggests that, in the LLM era, the value of KGs lies not merely in serving as retrieval
resources, as in standard RAG pipelines, but in functioning as explicit and inspectable validation
substrates that determine whether model-generated claims are applicable in a given context.
This property is especially important in LLM-based agent systems, where generating plausible
outputs is not the sole objective, and reliable performance requires verifying whether the claims
underlying those outputs are supported by external evidence and context (Dougrez-Lewis et al.,
2025; Kolli et al., 2025).
Conventional KGs typically represent knowledge as triples consisting of a head entity, a relation,
and a tail entity. A useful way to characterize the applicability of a triplet τ = (h, r, t) is through
a context-dependent probabilistic quantity P(τ | C), where C denotes the observation context.
Different KG paradigms can then be viewed as different parameterizations of this quantity:
P(τ | C) =







{0, 1},
conventional KG,
µτ,
probabilistic KG,
Fτ(C),
triplet-specific function.
Here, µτ ∈[0, 1]. The first case treats triplets as universally valid or invalid, the second encodes
a population-level prior, and the third allows validity to be determined by a triplet-specific
function Fτ that takes context C as input; in practice, Fτ may be instantiated as an explicit
function, a classical statistical learning model such as logistic regression or XGBoost, or an LLM.
This distinction matters because, in most real-world settings, triplet validity depends on context:
P(τ | C) is not constant over C. Standard triplet-based KGs collapse this dependence into a
binary value that records only whether a triplet holds, limiting their usefulness as validation
substrates. Prior efforts have partially relaxed this assumption with structured qualifiers such as
temporal scopes and hyper-relational key-value attributes (Galkin et al., 2020; Saxena et al.,
2021), but these still capture only selected dimensions of C, whereas real-world conditions are
often richer and more complex (Ding et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023).
This issue is especially consequential in medicine, where incorrect validation can lead to harmful
conclusions. In this setting, P(τ | C) is rarely a universal constant: whether a medical claim
holds often depends on patient-specific context such as comorbidities, laboratory findings, disease
stage, treatment history, and contraindications. Some prior work has replaced binary validity
with probabilistic validity (Li et al., 2020b), corresponding to a population-level prior such as
µτ. While this captures aggregate uncertainty, it still does not explicitly specify the concrete
contexts under which a knowledge statement should or should not be considered applicable for a
particular case.
To address this limitation, we turn to triplet-specific functions and seek a practical way to imple-
ment and evaluate Fτ(C). In this paper, we operationalize Fτ(C) by attaching natural-language
validity conditions to relations. To make this implementation scalable, triplet applicability cannot
be reduced to a small set of manually engineered structured fields, because the relevant conditions
are often diverse and compositional. We therefore represent these conditions as natural-language
constraints, which preserve expressive flexibility while remaining compatible with LLM-based
interpretation and downstream evaluation. Hereafter, we refer to the Fτ(C)-based formulation of

[Page 4]
Working Draft
4
A. Context-Insensitive KG
P(τ|C) ∈ {0,1}
unable to model context-dependent validity
(drug A, treats, disease B)
Context 1: patient without
renal failure
holds
Context 2: patient with
renal failure
does not hold
B. Quantum Knowledge Graph
P(τ|C) = Fτ(C)
models context-dependent validity with LLMs
(drug A, treats, disease B)
patient with eGFR >= 60 mL/min/1.73 m^2,
UACR < 30 mg/g, and no other clues of renal failure
Validity condition
C. Reasoner-Validator System
Medical question
Reasoner
LLM only
Validator
QKG
ﬁnal answer
patient context
answer + claims
validation report
D. Outcome
accuracy
LLM
only
LLM +
KG
LLM +
QKG
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed Quantum Knowledge Graph (QKG) framework. Panel A
illustrates the limitation of conventional knowledge graph triples, whose validity is effectively
reduced to a context-insensitive binary assignment and therefore may hold in one patient context
but fail in another. Panel B shows how QKG operationalizes the triplet-specific function Fτ(C)
by attaching natural-language validity conditions, enabling context-dependent triplet evaluation
with LLMs. Panel C presents the reasoner-validator setup used in this work, where a reasoner
generates an answer and its supporting claims, and a QKG-based validator evaluates those
claims against the patient context and graph knowledge. Panel D summarizes the qualitative
performance trend observed in our experiments, where QKG-based validation outperforms
validation with the original KG and the no-validator baseline.
triplet validity as a Quantum Knowledge Graph (QKG)2, emphasizing that whether a knowledge
statement is valid depends on the observation context in which it is evaluated.
Based on this formulation, we instantiate QKG in the medical domain by curating a graph
from PrimeKG (Chandak et al., 2023) and building a validator agent that evaluates whether
medical claims are supported in the patient context. We then integrate this validator into
a reasoner-validator pipeline for LLM-based reasoning, and evaluate the resulting system on
medical question answering using samples from MedReason (Wu et al., 2025a) whose entities are
covered by the curated graph. Our experiments compare QKG-based validation against both
the original KG and the no-validator baseline, and show that QKG-based validation improves
system performance over both.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: 1) we introduce a triplet-validity
framing in which the applicability of a knowledge statement is modeled as a context-dependent
quantity P(τ | C), and operationalize its triplet-specific form Fτ(C) as a Quantum Knowledge
Graph (QKG); 2) we instantiate this formulation in medicine by curating a QKG derived from
PrimeKG and building a QKG-based validator agent; and 3) we show that integrating QKG-
based validation into an LLM reasoner-validator pipeline improves medical question answering
over relevant baselines. All curated QKG data and experimental code will be open-sourced.
2Here, “quantum” refers to context-dependent validity rather than quantum-theoretic formalism.

[Page 5]
Working Draft
5
2 Background
2.1 Context-Dependent Validity in Knowledge Graphs
Conventional knowledge graphs represent facts as triples (h, r, t) and usually treat each triple
as globally valid once it is stored. A substantial body of work has already shown that this
assumption is too restrictive. One direction is to enrich triples with qualifiers or additional
attributes. Hyper-relational KG methods, such as StarE (Galkin et al., 2020), explicitly model
relation-specific qualifiers and demonstrate that many facts are better understood as statements
that hold together with auxiliary conditions rather than as isolated triples. Another direction is
temporalization: temporal KG question answering and reasoning methods allow facts to hold
only during specific intervals or at specific granularities, showing that validity may depend on
time rather than being universal (Saxena et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2024). Taken
together, these works establish an important general point: triplet validity is often conditional.
At the same time, existing contextual extensions usually operationalize context through a limited
and pre-specified structure. Hyper-relational KGs assume that relevant contextual dimensions
can be attached as explicit qualifiers, while temporal KGs focus primarily on time. These are
important advances, but they do not fully address settings where applicability depends on richer
and more compositional conditions that are difficult to enumerate in advance. In such cases, the
central problem is no longer whether a fact exists in the graph, but in what context that fact
should be regarded as valid.
2.2 Context-Dependent Validity in Medical Knowledge Graphs
This limitation is especially visible in medicine, where the validity of a knowledge statement
often depends on patient-specific details such as comorbidities, laboratory findings, disease
stage, medication history, and contraindications. Biomedical KGs such as PrimeKG (Chandak
et al., 2023) provide broad relational coverage for precision medicine, but their edges mainly
record that an association exists, not the exact conditions under which it should be applied
to a particular patient. Prior medical KG research has already moved beyond the plain-triple
formulation in two relevant ways. Li et al. (Li et al., 2020b) propose a real-world medical KG
with a quadruplet structure, showing that clinical facts often require richer factual representation
than a bare (h, r, t) tuple. Li et al. (Li et al., 2020a) further introduce a probabilistic medical
KG embedding method that models uncertainty at the triplet level, moving from binary validity
toward population-level confidence. These studies are important because they show that medical
knowledge is neither purely context-free nor strictly deterministic.
Related work in clinical temporal knowledge graphs reinforces the same point from a different
angle. Diao et al. (Diao et al., 2021) model temporal clinical KGs for diabetic complication
prediction, showing that medical knowledge use is often inseparable from evolving clinical
context. However, richer schemas, temporalization, and probabilistic weighting still do not
directly provide a mechanism for deciding whether a specific triplet is applicable to a specific
patient in a given question. Benchmarks such as MedReason (Wu et al., 2025a) make the need
for KG-grounded medical reasoning concrete: the task is not only to retrieve medically related
entities and relations, but also to organize them into reasoning paths that are consistent with
clinical logic and evidence-based medicine. This motivates treating triplet validity itself as
context-dependent, rather than assuming that retrieval of relevant facts is sufficient.

[Page 6]
Working Draft
6
3 Method
3.1 Knowledge Sources
3.1.1 Disease-Centric Subgraph from PrimeKG
PrimeKG (Chandak et al., 2023) provides the source biomedical knowledge graph for this work.
Working with the full graph is computationally prohibitive and introduces noise irrelevant to a
given clinical domain. We therefore construct a focused subgraph centered on a target disease
entity—in our experiments, diabetes mellitus (MONDO:5015). The construction proceeds in
two layers. The direct layer collects all triplets (h, r, t) ∈PrimeKG in which either h or t
is the target disease entity, yielding the intermediate entity set E1 of entities one hop away
from diabetes. The indirect layer then collects all triplets in which at least one endpoint
belongs to E1, capturing second-order associations—e.g., drugs that act on proteins involved in
diabetes-related pathways—without expanding to the entire graph. The two layers are merged
and deduplicated to form the final subgraph Gsub. The direct layer yields 1,470 triplets and
|E1| = 735 intermediate entities; the indirect layer contributes a further 861,070 triplets. After
deduplication, Gsub contains 862,540 triplets across 18,387 unique entities spanning 10
biomedical entity types (gene/protein, drug, disease, biological process, phenotype, pathway,
exposure, molecular function, cellular component, and anatomy) and 25 relation types.
3.1.2 Focused Relation Annotation
Most PrimeKG relation types encode biological or molecular facts whose validity is relatively
stable across patient contexts. We therefore focus on relation types whose applicability is more
likely to vary with patient-specific factors: indication, contraindication, off-label use,
and drug_effect. For each unique triplet (h, r, t) over these four types, we use the Baichuan-
M2-Plus API (Baichuan Intelligence, 2025) to generate evidence about population-specific
applicability. The outputs are stored as structured ConstraintItem records, each containing the
patient_characteristics in which the relation holds (e.g., “eGFR < 30”, “HbA1c > 9%”),
an applicability level drawn from a five-point ordinal scale (Definitely Applicable through
Definitely NOT Applicable), and supporting evidence text. The resulting relation_with_facts
collection contains 68,651 annotated facts spanning 2,591 unique entities and 4 relation types.
These annotations are retrieved at inference time to support patient-context filtering.
3.2 Reasoning Pipeline
We implement a two-agent loop in which a pure-LLM Reasoner and a KG-grounded Validator
collaborate iteratively (Figure 1, Panel C). The Reasoner first proposes an answer and emits
structured claims; the Validator then checks each claim against the QKG and the patient
context; finally, the Reasoner reconsiders its answer in light of the resulting validation report.
To perform this validation step, the patient context is derived directly from the clinical question,
including demographic factors, comorbidities, laboratory values, and current medications. For
each retrieved KG relation, the Validator examines its associated ConstraintItem records and
determines whether the constraint applies to the current patient. Relations whose constraints are
not met are down-weighted or excluded before being used as evidence, allowing claim verification
to be conditioned on the patient context rather than on raw graph connectivity alone. In
our implementation, the validator is allowed up to 20 tool-use turns per round. Algorithm 1
summarizes the full procedure.

[Page 7]
Working Draft
7
Algorithm 1 QKG Reasoning Pipeline
Require: question Q, choices C, knowledge graph Gsub
Ensure: final answer A∗
1: P ←ExtractPatientContext(Q)
2: (A, claims) ←Reasoner(Q, C)
▷pure LLM; emits claims for answer options
3: for each claim c ∈claims do
4:
E ←SearchEntities(c)
5:
R ←GetRelationsWithContext(E, Gsub)
6:
RP ←ApplyConstraintItems(R, P)
7:
if RP supports c then
8:
status(c) ←SUPPORTED
9:
else if RP contradicts c then
10:
status(c) ←CONTRADICTED
11:
else
12:
status(c) ←NO_COVERAGE
13:
end if
14: end for
15: report ←{(c, status(c)) | c ∈claims}
16: if any claim in report is CONTRADICTED then
17:
A∗←Reasoner(Q, C, report)
▷reconsider
18: else
19:
A∗←A
20: end if
21: return A∗
3.3 Statistical Testing
To test whether accuracy differences between two pipeline settings are statistically significant,
we apply McNemar’s test on paired per-sample correctness. For settings A and B evaluated on
the same questions, let b and c denote the counts of samples that are correct under A but wrong
under B, and wrong under A but correct under B, respectively. Under the null hypothesis that
each discordant flip is equally likely in either direction, we report the exact two-sided binomial p-
value p = min{1, 2 Pb+c
k=max(b,c)
 b+c
k
2−(b+c)}. For comparisons against the no-validator baseline,
the reasoner-only correctness is treated as condition A and the validated final correctness as
condition B on the same run. For leakage-adjusted comparisons on the Qwen-validator runs,
samples are removed before the paired test if, in either run, their W→C revision was labelled
LIKELY_LEAKAGE or their C→W regression was labelled LIKELY_KG_SUPPORTED with decisive
evidence citing a QKG applicability token (the ctx-driven subset). This matches the per-run
adjustment in Eq. 1 (Appendix A.3).
4 Experimental Setup
This section describes the datasets, evaluation protocol, and compared settings used in our
experiments.
4.1 Datasets
We evaluate our approach on medical question answering using samples from MedReason (Wu
et al., 2025a), a medical reasoning dataset of approximately 30,000 questions built from seven

[Page 8]
Working Draft
8
source QA datasets: MedQA, MedMCQA, PubMedQA, MMLU, MedXpert, HuatuoGPT-o1,
and the medical subset of Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE). To ensure alignment with our curated
PrimeKG subset, we construct a KG-grounded evaluation set by extracting question and option
entities, grounding them to UMLS, aligning them to PrimeKG nodes, filtering out samples
with no recoverable KG paths, and annotating patient characteristics from the question text for
downstream context matching. The resulting evaluation set contains 2,788 samples spanning
a range of diabetes-related clinical scenarios with verified KG coverage.
Detailed dataset
construction steps and a table reporting QA-source distributions are provided in Appendix A.1.
4.2 Evaluation Protocol
For each sample, the model generates a single answer (A–J) along with structured reasoning.
Outputs are constrained using a Pydantic schema (QAResponse; see Appendix A.2) to ensure
consistent JSON formatting. Evaluation is fully automated by parsing model outputs and
computing exact-match accuracy against the gold answers.
The primary evaluation metric is exact-match accuracy, defined as the proportion of predictions
that match the gold answer. We also report secondary metrics for the reasoner-validator pipeline,
including the number and percentage of cases whose answers change after validation, as well as
how often those revisions improve or degrade final correctness.
4.3 Models and Compared Settings
The main experiments use two LLMs: Haiku-4.5 (Anthropic, 2025) and Qwen-3.6-Plus (Qwen
Team, 2026). We treat Haiku-4.5 as the baseline model and Qwen-3.6-Plus as the higher-capability
model in our study setup. We compare three settings: a no-validator baseline, KG validation
without context matching, and QKG validation with context matching. These settings are used
to study both patient-context ablation and model-capacity effects in the reasoner–validator
pipeline.
5 Results
5.1 Main Results and Patient-Context Ablation
Figure 2 shows the main results on the curated evaluation set (N = 2,788). Across all three
settings, Haiku-4.5 is used as the Reasoner; in the two validation settings, Haiku-4.5 is also used
as the Validator. The main ablation compares KG validation without context matching against
QKG validation with context matching.
Validation changes 2.19% of answers in the no-context setting (39 W→C, 22 C→W) and 2.55%
in the with-context setting (55 W→C, 16 C→W), so the with-context setting also yields a higher
wrong-to-correct rate and a lower correct-to-wrong rate.
5.2 Case Studies of Context-Dependent Correction
Figure 3 presents two case studies of context-dependent correction. The top case is a compositional
patient-context example, where the validator combines multiple patient-specific factors—age,
smoking, alcohol use, and temporal proximity to ciprofloxacin exposure—to revise the initial
answer. The bottom case is a threshold-based example, where the validator matches a patient-
specific platelet count of 95,000/mm3 against the eligibility threshold for IV tPA.

[Page 9]
Working Draft
9
No validator
KG w/o context
QKG w/ context
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
Final accuracy (%)
77.5
78.1
(+0.6 pp)
78.9
(+1.4 pp)
(a) Final Accuracy
No validator
KG without context
QKG with context
0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of answers revised
No validator
KG w/o context
QKG w/ context
no revisions
39
22
net +17
55
16
net +39
(b) Validator Revisions
Improved (W
C)
Regressed (C
W)
Haiku-Validator Results and Context Ablation
Figure 2: Haiku-validator results and context ablation on the curated evaluation set (N = 2,788),
using Haiku-4.5 as the Reasoner throughout. Panel (a) shows final accuracy for the no-validator
baseline, KG validation without context matching, and QKG validation with context matching;
the two validation settings use Haiku-4.5 as the Validator. Panel (b) shows the number of
answers revised by validation, separated into wrong-to-correct improvements and correct-to-
wrong regressions. Paired McNemar tests (exact two-sided; Section 3.3) confirm all three pairwise
differences: baseline vs. KG w/o context p=0.04, baseline vs. QKG w/ context p≈3.8×10−6,
and KG w/o context vs. QKG w/ context p=0.014.
5.3 Qwen-3.6-Plus as Validator
Figure 4 shows the strong-validator comparison on the same curated evaluation set (N = 2,788).
Across all three settings, Haiku-4.5 is used as the Reasoner. The comparison then varies whether
validation is absent, performed with KG evidence without context matching, or performed
with QKG validation with context matching, using Qwen-3.6-Plus as the Validator in the
latter two settings. Qwen-3.6-Plus is substantially stronger than Haiku-4.5 on this set—its
standalone accuracy as a reasoner is 89.1%, against the 77.5% Haiku-4.5 reasoner baseline—so
this configuration pairs a weaker Reasoner with a stronger Validator, which is the setting in
which validator-supplied prior knowledge is most likely to contaminate the measured validation
gain.
Case studies of strong-validator answer leakage.
Two W→C revisions from the no-
context Qwen-3.6-Plus validator run illustrate how leakage manifests. In qa_9542 (gold: shingles
vaccine), the KG provides no directly relevant scheduling edge for any option, yet the elimination
of the gold answer is still flagged CONTRADICTED on a seasonal-influenza-timing argument the
Validator supplies itself. In qa_6324 (gold: antibiotic prophylaxis before molar extraction),
two CONTRADICTED statuses similarly rest on validator-supplied medical knowledge after the KG
lookup fails to return a directly relevant edge—one citing AHA prophylaxis guidance for the
gold answer, the other citing general pharmacology of nitrous oxide and trapped gas spaces for
the eliminated option. Full vignettes, quoted evidence, and the with-context status pattern on
these samples are in Appendix A.4.

[Page 10]
Working Draft
10
Figure 3: Two case studies of context-dependent correction. The top panel shows a compo-
sitional risk-amplifier case, where the validator combines multiple patient-specific factors to
identify fluoroquinolone-associated tendinopathy. The bottom panel shows a threshold-based
contraindication case, where the validator matches a patient-specific platelet count to the eligi-
bility threshold for IV tPA.
Quantitative leakage classification.
To estimate how often validator answer leakage drives
W→C revisions, we label each W→C case in both Qwen-validator runs as likely KG-supported,
mixed, or likely leakage, based on whether the validator’s decisive CONTRADICTED evidence cites
a KG entity/relation (or a QKG applicability annotation), pivots from a KG gap to clinical-
guideline knowledge, or sits between the two. The exact rules, the LLM re-labelling step for
cases the regex leaves indeterminate, the leakage-adjusted accuracy formula, and the released
per-case CSV are described in Appendix A.3.
Table 1 summarizes the high-level accounting, and Table 2 reports the class-level breakdown of
W→C and C→W revisions. Both runs leak comparably (∼55–60 W→C revisions labeled likely
leakage out of ∼200; Table 1), but the with-context run produces noticeably more KG-supported
W→C revisions (123 vs. 97; Table 2), and 27 of those explicitly invoke a QKG-specific applicability
token (AVOID, RECOMMENDED, CAUTION, ConstraintItem, or safety judgment) versus 0 in the
no-context run, indicating that the patient-context-conditioned QKG mechanism is responsible
for that excess. After dropping the likely-leakage W→C revisions and the ctx-driven KG-
supported C→W regressions from both numerator and denominator (Appendix A.3, Eq. 1),
the leakage-adjusted final accuracies are 82.88% in the no-context setting and 83.75% in the
with-context setting; both still exceed the no-validator Reasoner baseline (77.5%) by more

[Page 11]
Working Draft
11
No validator
KG w/o context
QKG w/ context
74
76
78
80
82
84
Final accuracy (%)
77.5
83.3
(+5.8 pp)
83.5
(+6.0 pp)
(a) Final Accuracy
No validator
KG without context
QKG with context
0
50
100
150
200
Number of answers revised
No validator
KG w/o context
QKG w/ context
no revisions
177
16
net +161
204
38
net +166
(b) Validator Revisions
Improved (W
C)
Regressed (C
W)
Qwen-Validator Results and Context Ablation
Figure 4: Qwen-validator results and context ablation on the curated evaluation set (N = 2,788),
with Haiku-4.5 used as the Reasoner throughout. Panel (a) shows final accuracy for the no-
validator baseline, KG validation without context matching, and QKG validation with context
matching. Panel (b) shows the corresponding wrong-to-correct improvements and correct-to-
wrong regressions.
than 5 percentage points, and the with-context setting still exceeds the no-context setting after
adjustment.
Leakage classification of C→W regressions.
Applying the same classifier to the C→W
regressions in both Qwen-validator runs tests whether the elevated C→W under QKG w/ context
reflects correct patient-context-conditioned elimination of an option whose underlying fact is
MCQ-gold (KG-supported), or validator-supplied prior knowledge that misled the Reasoner
away from gold (leakage). A C→W is decisive when a CONTRADICTED claim either contradicts
the option the Reasoner originally chose (the gold) or un-eliminates the option that eventually
became the final (wrong) answer; the regex rules and the LLM re-labeling pass on Unclassified
cases are the same as for the W→C classification. The resulting per-class counts are reported
alongside the W→C breakdown in Table 2. Of the 38 C→W in the with-context run, 36 are
KG-supported and only 1 is likely leakage; 20 of the 36 KG-supported cases explicitly cite a
QKG applicability token, versus 0 of the 12 KG-supported cases in the no-context run. The
increase from 16 to 38 C→W under QKG is therefore dominated by KG-supported regressions
(+24) and by QKG-token-driven regressions specifically (+20), not by validator hallucination.
6 Discussion
6.1 Not Merely Facts, but Applicable Knowledge
In clinical reasoning, the key issue is not whether a KG fact is medically related, but whether that
fact is applicable in the patient’s specific context. This is the central distinction highlighted by the
case studies in Section 5.2. In the first case, the validator succeeds only after combining multiple
patient-specific factors—age, smoking, alcohol use, and timing after ciprofloxacin exposure—to
determine that the drug-induced tendinopathy relation is applicable to this particular patient.

[Page 12]
Working Draft
12
Table 1: Leakage-adjusted accuracy accounting for the two Qwen-3.6-Plus validator runs (Haiku-
4.5 Reasoner throughout). W→C and C→W are the counts of wrong-to-correct revisions and
correct-to-wrong regressions after validation. Est. adj. is the total number of samples dropped
from the Adj. final accuracy; exclusion rules and the formula are in Appendix A.3, Eq. 1.
Class-level breakdowns of W→C and C→W are reported in Table 2. A paired McNemar test
for the with-context vs. no-context comparison gives exact two-sided p=0.73 on the raw paired
set (N=2,782, b=65, c=70), and p=0.05 on the leakage-adjusted subset (N=2,665, b=33, c=52;
samples flagged in either run removed). See Section 3.3.
Final Acc. (%)
Setting
N
W→C
C→W
Est. adj.
Raw
Adj.
KG w/o context
2,788
177
16
60
83.25
82.88
QKG w/ context
2,788
204
38
75
83.46
83.75
Table 2:
Class-level leakage-classification breakdown of W→C (wrong-to-correct) re-
visions
and
C→W
(correct-to-wrong)
regressions
in
the
two
Qwen-3.6-Plus
valida-
tor runs,
using the rules in Appendix A.3.
The parenthesised count under KG-
supp.
is
the
subset
whose
decisive
evidence
cites
a
QKG-specific
applicability
to-
ken (AVOID/RECOMMENDED/CAUTION/ConstraintItem/safety judgment). Each block’s class
columns sum to the W→C or C→W totals in Table 1.
W→C class counts
C→W class counts
Setting
KG-supp. (ctx)
Mixed
Leakage
KG-supp. (ctx)
Mixed
Leakage
KG w/o context
97 (0)
20
60
12 (0)
0
4
QKG w/ context
123 (27)
26
55
36 (20)
1
1
In the second case, the validator succeeds only by matching a concrete laboratory value, a
platelet count of 95,000/mm3, against the threshold for tPA eligibility. One case is compositional
and multifactorial; the other is threshold-based. Together, they show that the relevant clinical
knowledge cannot be treated as context-free once retrieved from the graph.
This is exactly the motivation for modeling triplet validity under context. If a KG edge is
treated as simply true once retrieved, the validator cannot distinguish between knowledge that
is generally relevant and knowledge that is actually valid for the current patient. In other words,
the failure mode is not simply missing facts; it is the inability to decide when a retrieved fact
should count as evidence. QKG addresses this problem by attaching conditions under which a
triplet should be accepted, contradicted, or ignored in the current patient context.
The aggregate results are consistent with this interpretation. Figure 2 suggests that merely
adding KG-backed knowledge is already somewhat useful, since KG validation without context
matching still improves over the no-validator baseline. But the larger gain comes from context-
aware validation: the full QKG setting performs better because it does not stop at retrieving
medically related knowledge, and instead decides whether a retrieved relation should count
for this patient. Figure 4 preserves the same ordering under a stronger validator, with QKG
with context matching still outperforming KG validation without context matching, which in
turn outperforms the no-validator baseline. Though the Qwen-as-validator result makes the
gap between with-context and without-context settings appear relatively small, in the next
subsection we argue that this pattern is compounded by the strong validator’s own model-internal
knowledge. Even with that caution, the repeated ordering still supports the central idea that
applicability carries useful signal beyond raw factual relatedness alone.

[Page 13]
Working Draft
13
6.2 Why Strong-Validator Results Require Caution
The Qwen-3.6-Plus validator results are harder to interpret causally than the Haiku-validator
ablation. The case studies in Section 5.3 and the log analysis summarized in Table 1 show that
both Qwen-validator runs contain answer leakage: some wrong-to-correct revisions are driven by
validator-supplied medical or guideline knowledge rather than by a directly relevant retrieved
edge, so the raw gains in both Qwen settings are not clean measurements of graph-grounded
validation.
We read both the paired-test null (p=0.73) between raw accuracy w/ context and w/o context
and the elevated C→W under w/ context (38 vs. 16) in Table 1 as symptoms of the benchmark’s
fact-level rather than patient-level gold, not of a noisy QKG mechanism. Applying the per-case
leakage classifier to the C→W regressions (Table 2) supports this reading directly: 36 of 38
QKG-w/-context C→W cases are KG-supported and only 1 is likely leakage, with 20 of the
KG-supported cases explicitly citing QKG applicability tokens (versus 0 of 12 KG-supported
C→W in the no-context run). The elevated C→W under QKG is therefore dominated by
patient-context-conditioned reasoning that correctly eliminates an option whose underlying fact
is nonetheless the one the MCQ gold rewards, not by validator-supplied prior knowledge at
the applicability step. Removing these benchmark-gold-noise cases from the paired comparison
confirms the reading quantitatively: the leakage-adjusted paired McNemar (Section 3.3) shifts
the with-context vs. no-context p-value from 0.73 on the raw set to 0.05 on the adjusted set—right
at the conventional α=0.05 threshold, turning a strong null into a borderline-significant effect
once the benchmark-gold-noise cases are removed.
QKG’s context effect should be most material in real-world clinical reasoning, where answers
routinely depend on context-conditioned combinations of evidence rather than single-fact recall.
In the absence of a suitable real-world benchmark (see Limitation and Future Work below), we
evaluate on MCQ medical QA, whose fact-level gold cannot fully expose this regime. On this
benchmark, Figure 2—the Haiku-validator context effect of +0.79 pp with paired McNemar
p=0.014—is the cleanest observation of the mechanism, whereas the Qwen-validator picture
requires the leakage adjustment to unmask the effect (p from 0.73 to 0.05) against the benchmark’s
fact-level gold.
6.3 Limitations and Future Work
The main limitation of the current study is that evaluation on benchmark medical QA cannot
fully disentangle QKG-based contextual validation from model-internal medical knowledge. This
issue becomes especially important for strong validators, whose gains may reflect both explicit
use of patient-conditioned KG evidence and prior familiarity with benchmark-style medical
questions. A cleaner test would use real-world patient-level reasoning tasks, but such evaluation
remains difficult because publicly available clinical datasets rarely provide scalable gold-standard
labels for contextual reasoning, while routine clinical data are often noisy, incomplete, and
not annotated with unambiguous reasoning traces. Existing open clinical resources are highly
valuable, but they are usually optimized either for general EHR access, as in MIMIC-IV (Johnson
et al., 2023), or for predictive benchmarking, as in EHRSHOT’s few-shot patient classification
tasks (Wornow et al., 2023), rather than for evaluating whether a system can determine which
knowledge is applicable under a patient’s specific context. The current results should therefore be
interpreted as strong benchmark evidence for the usefulness of QKG, but not yet as a definitive
causal measurement of its contribution in real-world clinical workflows.
In future work, we aim to build such a real-world clinical reasoning benchmark and share it
with the community. Our goal is to use it not only to test QKG under more realistic clinical
conditions, but also to diagnose its failure modes and improve context-dependent KG validation

[Page 14]
Working Draft
14
at larger scale.
7 Conclusion
This paper introduces the Quantum Knowledge Graph (QKG), a framework for modeling triplet
validity as context-dependent rather than context-insensitive. We instantiate QKG in the medical
domain by augmenting KG relations with natural-language applicability conditions and using
them in a reasoner–validator pipeline for medical question answering. Under a matched Haiku-4.5
Reasoner–Validator setting, patient-context matching delivers a small but paired-significant
gain over KG validation without context (+0.79 pp, p=0.014), and both settings exceed the
no-validator baseline. Under a stronger validator (Qwen-3.6-Plus), the raw paired gap is a null
(p=0.73) that becomes borderline significant (p=0.05) after adjusting for knowledge leakage and
suspicious questions—consistent with a benchmark-gold ceiling in multiple-choice medical QA
rather than QKG redundancy—and we propose real-world clinical reasoning tasks as a direct
next step for testing context-dependent KG validation at larger scale. More broadly, the findings
support the view that the value of a knowledge graph in LLM-based reasoning lies not only
in storing relevant facts, but in representing whether those facts are applicable in the specific
context in which they are used.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by City University of Hong Kong under project number 9610777.
We gratefully acknowledge Baichuan Intelligence for providing complimentary token credits to
support our use of the Baichuan M2 Plus model. We also thank Dr. Linfeng Li, lead author
of Li et al. (2020b,a), for his insightful discussions with us, which helped inspire this work. In
addition, we thank Prof. Wei-Ying Ma, Director of HKAI-Sci, for encouraging our exploration
of this research frontier.
Reproducibility Checklist.
See Appendix A.5 for release and reproducibility details.
References
Anthropic.
Introducing
claude
haiku
4.5.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-haiku-4-5, 10 2025. Release note; accessed 2026-04-17.
Baichuan Intelligence. Baichuan-m2 technical blog. https://www.baichuan-ai.com/blog/
baichuan-M2, 2025. Accessed 2026-04-13.
P. Chandak et al. Primekg: A knowledge graph for precision medicine. Scientific Data, 2023.
Ziyang Chen, Jinzhi Liao, and Xiang Zhao.
Multi-granularity temporal question answer-
ing over knowledge graphs.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 11380–11395. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.637.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.637/.
Lijuan Diao, Wei Yang, Penghua Zhu, Gaofang Cao, Shoujun Song, and Yang Kong. The
research of clinical temporal knowledge graph based on deep learning. Journal of Intelligent
& Fuzzy Systems, 41(3):4265–4274, 2021. doi: 10.3233/JIFS-189687.

[Page 15]
Working Draft
15
Zejin Ding, Ning Wang, Shujian Liu, and Guodong Zhou. Temporal fact reasoning over hyper-
relational knowledge graphs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2024, pages 345–357. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/
v1/2024.findings-emnlp.20. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.20/.
John Dougrez-Lewis, Mahmud Elahi Akhter, Federico Ruggeri, Sebastian Löbbers, Yulan He, and
Maria Liakata. Assessing the reasoning capabilities of llms in the context of evidence-based
claim verification. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025,
pages 20604–20628. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.
findings-acl.1059. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.1059/.
Mikhail Galkin, Priyansh Trivedi, Gaurav Maheshwari, Ricardo Usbeck, and Jens Lehmann.
Message passing for hyper-relational knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 7346–7366. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.596. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.596/.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng,
Tom J. Pollard, Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, Li-wei H. Lehman, Leo A. Celi,
and Roger G. Mark. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. Scientific
Data, 10(1):1, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01899-x.
Shaghayegh Kolli, Richard Rosenbaum, Timo Cavelius, Lasse Strothe, Andrii Lata, and Jana
Diesner. Hybrid fact-checking that integrates knowledge graphs, large language models, and
search-based retrieval agents improves interpretable claim verification. In Proceedings of the 9th
Widening NLP Workshop, pages 106–115. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. doi:
10.18653/v1/2025.winlp-main.19. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.winlp-main.19/.
Linfeng Li, Peng Wang, Yao Wang, Shenghui Wang, Jun Yan, Jinpeng Jiang, Buzhou Tang,
Chengliang Wang, and Yuting Liu. A method to learn embedding of a probabilistic medical
knowledge graph: Algorithm development. JMIR Medical Informatics, 8(5):e17645, 2020a.
doi: 10.2196/17645.
Linfeng Li, Peng Wang, Jun Yan, Yao Wang, Simin Li, Jinpeng Jiang, Zhe Sun, Buzhou Tang,
Tsung-Hui Chang, Shenghui Wang, and Yuting Liu. Real-world data medical knowledge graph:
construction and applications. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 103:101817, 2020b. doi:
10.1016/j.artmed.2020.101817.
Marinela Parović, Ze Li, and Jinhua Du. Generating domain-specific knowledge graphs from large
language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025,
pages 11558–11574, Vienna, Austria, 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.602. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.
602/.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.6-plus: Towards real world agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?email_hash=
0d7a7050906b225db2718485ca0f3472&id=qwen3.6, 4 2026. Release note; accessed 2026-04-
17.
Apoorv Saxena, Aakash Tripathi, and Partha Talukdar. Question answering over temporal knowl-
edge graphs. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 6663–6676. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.520. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.520/.

[Page 16]
Working Draft
16
Yuan Sui, Yufei He, Zifeng Ding, and Bryan Hooi.
Can knowledge graphs make large
language models more trustworthy?
an empirical study over open-ended question an-
swering.
In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12685–12701, Vienna, Austria, 2025.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi:
10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.622.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.622/.
Michael Wornow, Rahul Thapa, Ethan Steinberg, Jason A. Fries, and Nigam H. Shah.
Ehrshot:
An ehr benchmark for few-shot evaluation of foundation models.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:
Datasets and Benchmarks
Track, 2023.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/
d42db1f74df54cb992b3956eb7f15a6f-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf.
Juncheng Wu, Wenlong Deng, Xingxuan Li, Sheng Liu, Taomian Mi, Yifan Peng, Ziyang Xu,
Yi Liu, Hyunjin Cho, Chang-In Choi, et al. Medreason: Eliciting factual medical reasoning
steps in llms via knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00993, 2025a.
Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yunli Qi, Jingkun Chen, Min Xu, Filippo Menolascina, Yueming Jin,
and Vicente Grau. Medical graph rag: Evidence-based medical large language model via graph
retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 28443–28467, Vienna, Austria,
2025b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1381. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1381/.
A Appendix
A.1 Evaluation Dataset Construction
We derive the evaluation set from MedReason (Wu et al., 2025a) through a four-stage pipeline.
QA source distribution.
Table 3 reports the distribution of source datasets in the full
MedReason collection and in the curated evaluation set. The curated set is strongly skewed
toward MedQA (71.0%), reflecting that MedQA questions tend to involve rich clinical scenarios
with multiple named entities, yielding higher PrimeKG path counts and thus higher ranks after
Stage 3 filtering.
Stage 1: Entity extraction and UMLS grounding.
For each question and its answer
choices, an LLM-based agent extracts named medical entities. Each entity name is embedded
and matched to a UMLS CUI via approximate nearest-neighbor search over a precomputed
UMLS embedding index (Tencent VectorDB, google/gemini-embedding-001, 768 dimensions).
Stage 2: PrimeKG alignment.
Each UMLS CUI is mapped to PrimeKG nodes through two
strategies applied in order: (i) direct (source, id) match where the CUI resolves to a PrimeKG
entity identifier, and (ii) UMLS hierarchy traversal, which walks ancestor CUIs until a match
is found in PrimeKG. This two-stage alignment tolerates the ontological gap between UMLS
concepts and PrimeKG entities.

[Page 17]
Working Draft
17
Table 3: QA-source distribution for the full MedReason dataset (N = 32,682) and the curated
evaluation set (N = 2,788). Percentages are row-normalized within each column.
MedReason (full)
Curated set
Source
n
%
n
%
MedQA
8,016
24.5
1,981
71.0
PubMedQA (artificial)
8,094
24.8
62
2.3
HuatuoGPT-o1
6,475
19.8
313
11.2
MedMCQA
6,197
19.0
144
5.2
PubMedQA (unlabeled)
1,747
5.3
10
0.4
MMLU
827
2.5
58
2.1
MedXpertQA
666
2.0
208
7.5
PubMedQA
603
1.8
7
0.3
HLE (medical)
57
0.2
5
0.2
Total
32,682
100.0
2,788
100.0
Stage 3: Subgraph path filtering.
For each sample, we enumerate all 1-hop paths between
the matched PrimeKG nodes. Samples with no recoverable path (path count = 0) are excluded,
as QKG can provide no evidence for them. Remaining samples are ranked by path count and
the top 2,788 are retained, ensuring sufficient KG grounding for evaluation.
Stage 4:
Patient-characteristic annotation.
For each retained sample, a structured
PatientCharacter record is extracted from the question text using an LLM, capturing demo-
graphics (age, sex), diagnoses, laboratory values, and current medications. This record is used
as the patient context P at inference time (Algorithm 1).
A.2 QAResponse Schema
The question-answering outputs are constrained by the following Pydantic schema:
class QAResponse(BaseModel):
llm_answer_choice: str
selected_option_text: str
reasoning: str
A.3 Leakage-Classification Heuristic
This subsection records the rule set used to label every wrong-to-correct (W→C) revision
in Table 1. The classifier implementation and per-case labels are released with the paper
(Appendix A.5), enabling reviewers to audit any individual case.
Signals.
For each decisive CONTRADICTED evidence string e we test four signals via regex (full
pattern lists are in the script header):
• KG_SUPPORT(e): e cites a KG entity, relation, or edge as the basis of the contradiction (e.g.,
“KG confirms . . . indication relation,” “entity 30494 has direct positive phenotype relations
to AKI,” “KG explicitly links X to Y”).
• KG_GAP(e): e concedes that the KG had no relevant edge for the question (e.g., “KG lacks,”
“returned no,” “empty list,” “no clinical guideline data”).

[Page 18]
Working Draft
18
• PARAMETRIC(e): e asserts external clinical or guideline knowledge (e.g., “Medically,” “Clini-
cally,” “AHA/CDC/ACIP guidelines,” “standard of care”).
• CONTEXT(e): e contains a QKG-specific applicability token, matched narrowly so that generic
patient mentions do not count: case-sensitive AVOID, RECOMMENDED, or CAUTION (the upper-
case ConstraintItem labels emitted by the validator), or case-insensitive ConstraintItem
or safety judgment. The looser token applicability was deliberately excluded because
it appears in ordinary clinical-trial prose (e.g., “evidence-based applicability for this trial”)
and would produce false positives in the no-context run where the QKG ConstraintItem
layer is inactive.
Decisive evidence.
A CONTRADICTED item in the validation report is decisive if either (i) its
supports flag is true and its option matches the Reasoner’s original answer, or (ii) its supports
flag is false and its option matches the gold answer. These are the items the Reasoner reconsiders
against. If no decisive items exist for a case, all CONTRADICTED items are used.
Algorithm 2 Per-case leakage classifier
1: function LabelEvidence(e)
2:
if Context(e) then return EvContext
3:
else if KgGap(e) and Parametric(e) then return EvLeakage
4:
else if Parametric(e) and not KgSupport(e) and not KgGap(e) then return
EvLeakage
5:
else if KgSupport(e) then return EvKgGrounded
6:
else return EvUnclassified
7:
end if
8: end function
9: function ClassifyCase(record)
10:
D ←decisive items in record.validation_report
11:
if D = ∅then D ←all CONTRADICTED items
12:
end if
13:
L ←{LabelEvidence(e.evidence) : e ∈D}
14:
supp ←(EvContext ∈L) ∨(EvKgGrounded ∈L)
15:
leak ←EvLeakage ∈L
16:
if supp ∧leak then return Mixed
17:
else if supp then return LikelyKgSupported
18:
else if leak then return LikelyLeakage
19:
else return Unclassified
20:
end if
21: end function
Adjusted accuracy.
The leakage-adjusted final accuracy reported in Table 1 drops, from both
numerator and denominator, (i) W→C revisions labelled LikelyLeakage (validator-parametric
credit rather than clean graph-grounded validation), and (ii) C→W regressions whose decisive
evidence cites a QKG applicability token (the ctx-driven subset of LikelyKgSupported C→W),
on the grounds of Section 5.2’s argument that these are QKG correctly eliminating an option
whose underlying fact is MCQ-gold—a benchmark-gold quality issue rather than a QKG failure:
adj_final_acc = # final_correct −nW→C
leak
N −nW→C
leak
−nC→W
ctx
,
(1)

[Page 19]
Working Draft
19
where nW→C
leak
denotes W→C revisions labelled LikelyLeakage and nC→W
ctx
denotes C→W
regressions whose decisive evidence cites a QKG applicability token. For W→C we adjust away
only the LikelyLeakage bucket: the Mixed bucket contains both KG-supported and leakage
signals across decisive evidence, so its W→C revisions are not assumed to be entirely leakage-
driven, and the Unclassified bucket includes many W→C revisions whose evidence cites a
specific KG entity or relation in phrasing that the regex does not match (e.g., “KG entity 30494
has direct positive phenotype relations to acute kidney injury” for sample qa_6771); treating
all of them as leakage would be too pessimistic. For C→W we drop only the ctx-driven subset
of LikelyKgSupported, not the full LikelyKgSupported column, because Section 5.2’s
benchmark-gold argument rests specifically on the QKG applicability-token evidence (20 for
QKG w/ context vs. 0 for no-context). The reported adjustment is therefore conservative in
both directions, and the per-case CSV makes alternative aggregations trivial to compute.
Sanity check.
On a set of 17 W→C cases that we manually labelled as either context-driven
(9 cases) or leakage (8 cases) prior to running the classifier, ClassifyCase agrees on 9/9
context-driven cases and 7/8 leakage cases. The single disagreement (qa_2856) is now caught
by the pure-parametric branch of LabelEvidence introduced after the manual labelling.
LLM re-labeling of Unclassified cases.
The regex pass leaves 29 W→C cases in the
no-context run and 27 in the with-context run as Unclassified, and 3 C→W cases in each
run. Manual inspection of a sample (e.g., qa_6771, whose decisive evidence is “KG entity 30494
has direct positive phenotype relations to acute kidney injury”) showed that many such cases
do cite KG content but in phrasing that the regex does not match. Because the combined
Unclassified set is small (62 cases total), we re-label each Unclassified case by prompting
the Haiku-4.5 LLM (configuration key patient-context-llm) with the same decisive evidence
strings and asking it to assign one of LikelyKgSupported, Mixed, LikelyLeakage, or
Unclassified. The same prompt is used for W→C and C→W up to a short preamble describing
the flip direction. The two re-label drivers and the combined per-case CSVs (regex label, LLM
label, source of the final label, and the LLM’s one-sentence justification) are released with the
paper (Appendix A.5), enabling any individual decision to be audited.
A.4 Strong-Validator Answer-Leakage Case Studies
The two cases below are wrong-to-correct revisions from the Qwen-3.6-Plus validator run without
patient-context filtering (Section 5.3). Each case lists the relevant question and option set,
the Reasoner’s initial answer, the Validator’s per-option status and verbatim evidence string,
and the Reasoner’s reconsideration outcome. Both revisions are produced even though the KG
returns no edge that directly contradicts the Reasoner’s chosen option, and the Validator’s
CONTRADICTED justification is delivered as validator-supplied medical or guideline knowledge
after the KG lookup fails to yield a directly relevant edge.
The per-option status patterns reported below—multiple NO_COVERAGE flags on the recommendation-
relevant options—are specific to the no-context run. In the with-context run, the same Validator
returns SUPPORTED on several of these options for the same samples (e.g., options B/A/C in
qa_9542 and options B/D in qa_6324), indicating that patient-context-conditioned QKG an-
notations were retrieved when patient context was supplied. The cases below should therefore
be read as illustrations of the no-context leakage pattern, not as descriptions of with-context
Validator behavior on these samples.

[Page 20]
Working Draft
20
Case A: qa_9542 (gold = D, shingles vaccine).
Vignette. A 62-year-old woman is seen
in June for a routine check-up. Past history includes appendectomy, chronic back pain, normal
mammogram 6 months ago, normal Pap smear 2 years ago, normal colonoscopy 5 years ago.
Her immunisation record shows: never received pneumococcal or shingles vaccine; last tetanus
booster 6 years ago; last influenza vaccine 2 years ago. Vitals are within normal limits.
Options. (A) Colonoscopy. (B) Influenza vaccine. (C) Tetanus vaccine. (D) Shingles vaccine.
Reasoner answer. B (incorrect). Reasoner argues that influenza vaccine is annual and the
patient’s last dose was 2 years ago, making it “more immediately overdue” than shingles.
Validator report. Options A, B, and C receive NO_COVERAGE from the KG, while option D is
marked CONTRADICTED. Representative evidence strings:
[B, NO_COVERAGE] “KG contains ’influenza’ disease entity (index 37766) but lacks explicit
vaccination schedule, age-threshold, or dosing-interval relations. While medically accurate
that annual vaccination is standard, the KG does not encode this clinical guideline.”
[D, CONTRADICTED] “KG contains ’Varicella Zoster Vaccine’ entities (indices 20940, etc.)
but no scheduling data. Medically, this claim incorrectly eliminates D. For a 62-year-old
who has never received the shingles vaccine, RZV is a high-priority, age-based preventive
recommendation. Influenza vaccine, while annual, is season-dependent (patient seen in June,
off-season), making the Shingles vaccine the most appropriate immediate recommendation
per standard clinical guidelines. The claim’s reasoning to prioritize influenza over shingles is
clinically flawed for this vignette.”
Reconsideration. The Reasoner accepts the validator’s argument that influenza vaccination is
off-season in June and that the patient has never received the shingles vaccine, switches to D,
and matches the gold answer.
Case B: qa_6324 (gold = A, antibiotic prophylaxis before molar extraction).
Vi-
gnette. A 72-year-old man presents for medical clearance for a molar extraction. He climbs
three flights of stairs without dyspnea. Past history includes hypertension, type 2 diabetes
mellitus, ischemic heart disease, aortic valve replacement for severe aortic stenosis one year ago,
and angioplasty with two stents 12 years ago. Current medications include aspirin, warfarin,
lisinopril, metformin, sitagliptin, and simvastatin. A systolic ejection click is heard at the right
second intercostal space.
Options. (A) Administer oral amoxicillin 1 hour before the procedure. (B) Obtain echocardiog-
raphy prior to procedure. (C) Avoid nitrous oxide during the procedure. (D) Discontinue aspirin
and warfarin 72 hours prior to procedure.
Reasoner answer. C (incorrect). Reasoner argues that nitrous oxide is contraindicated in patients
with prosthetic valves due to expansion of gas-filled spaces.
Validator report. Options B and D receive NO_COVERAGE; options A and C receive CONTRADICTED.
Verbatim evidence:
[C, CONTRADICTED] “KG query for Nitrous oxide (DB06690) contraindications returned an
empty list. No edges link nitrous oxide to prosthetic valves or valve dysfunction. Medically,
nitrous oxide is contraindicated in closed gas-filled spaces (e.g., pneumothorax, bowel obstruc-
tion, intraocular gas), not in solid/metallic prosthetic heart valves. The claim is factually
incorrect.”
[A, CONTRADICTED] “KG search for Amoxicillin (DB01060) indications lists various bacterial
infections but contains no clinical guideline or prophylaxis protocol data. Medically, AHA
guidelines explicitly RECOMMEND antibiotic prophylaxis for patients with prosthetic
cardiac valves undergoing dental procedures involving gingival manipulation. The claim
incorrectly states it is not recommended.”

[Page 21]
Working Draft
21
Reconsideration. The Reasoner accepts both contradictions, removes nitrous-oxide contraindica-
tion as the chosen rationale, and revises to A, matching the gold answer.
A.5 Released Code and Data
The paper will be accompanied by the following two to-be-published projects.
• Codebase and results CSVs. A GitHub repository containing the evaluation code,
analysis scripts, paper materials, and results CSVs used in this work.
• Data assets. A separate data release comprising three Hugging Face dataset reposito-
ries: qkg-primekg-entities-with-cui for PrimeKG entities with UMLS CUI mappings;
qkg-relation-with-facts for the focused relation annotation / relation-facts dataset; and
qkg_qa_dataset for the curated QA evaluation dataset.
Reproducibility details.
The paper release packages the evaluation code, analysis scripts,
paper assets, and per-sample result CSVs together. The evaluation set is the curated N=2,788
KG-grounded MedReason subset used throughout the paper. Runtime settings are specified by
conf/config_template.yaml. The paper uses Haiku-4.5 as the Reasoner throughout, and Haiku-
4.5 or Qwen-3.6-Plus as the Validator depending on the experiment. The patient-context-llm
role is used only for the Appendix A.3 LLM re-labeling step and is not part of the agentic pipeline
itself. The main evaluation entrypoint is conditionKgTestAgentic.py. Paired significance tests
are reproduced by paper/data_result/significance_tests.py. The leakage re-label scripts
are classify_unclassified_with_llm.py and classify_unclassified_c2w_with_llm.py.