[Page 1]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural
Pest Diagnosis Using Caption-Prompt-Judge and LLM-as-a-Judge
Wentao Zhanga, Qi Zhangb, Mingkun Xuc, Mu Youd, Henghua Shend, Zhongzhi Hed,
Keyan Jind, Derek F. Wonge and Tao Fangd,∗
aBusiness School, Shandong University of Technology, Shandong, China
bFaculty of Data Science, City University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
cGuangdong Institute of Intelligent Science and Technology, Zhuhai, China
dMacau Millennium College, Macau SAR, China
eDepartment of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Agricultural VQA
Crop Disease Diagnosis
Explainable AI
Vision-Language Models
LLM-as-a-Judge
A B S T R A C T
Crop disease diagnosis from field photographs faces two recurring problems: models that score
well on benchmarks frequently hallucinate species names, and when predictions are correct,
the reasoning behind them is typically inaccessible to the practitioner. This paper describes
Agri-CPJ (Caption-Prompt-Judge), a training-free few-shot framework in which a large vision-
language model first generates a structured morphological caption, iteratively refined through
multi-dimensional quality gating, before any diagnostic question is answered. Two candidate
responses are then generated from complementary viewpoints, and an LLM judge selects the
stronger one based on domain-specific criteria. Caption refinement is the component with the
largest individual impact: ablations confirm that skipping it consistently degrades downstream
accuracy across both models tested. On CDDMBench, pairing GPT-5-Nano with GPT-5-mini-
generated captions yields +22.7 pp in disease classification and +19.5 points in QA score over
no-caption baselines. Evaluated without modification on AgMMU-MCQs, GPT-5-Nano reached
77.84% and Qwen-VL-Chat reached 64.54%, placing them at or above most open-source models
of comparable scale despite the format shift from open-ended to multiple-choice. The structured
caption and judge rationale together constitute a readable audit trail: a practitioner who disagrees
with a diagnosis can identify the specific caption observation that was incorrect. Code and data
are publicly available.1
1. Introduction
Accurate crop disease diagnosis from field imagery requires two properties that most current systems do not
simultaneously provide: correct identification of the pathogen or condition, and an explanation of that identification in
terms a practitioner can evaluate. Crop disease spreads rapidly, and an incorrect or unverifiable recommendation—an
erroneous fungicide prescription, or no actionable guidance at all—carries direct economic consequences. These twin
requirements motivate the framework described here.
Current mainstream solutions lean heavily on unimodal visual pipelines such as CNN classifiers (Duro et al., 2012)
and YOLO-style detectors (Badgujar et al., 2024). These models work well on the benchmarks they were trained for.
In our experience, however, they break down when moved even slightly out of distribution—different lighting, a new
crop variety, a slightly unusual growth stage—and when they do fail, they offer no clue as to why. What such a system
returns is, at best, a class label. For an agronomist weighing fungicide application costs against expected crop loss,
or an extension officer advising smallholders across several districts, a single predicted category provides no basis for
verifying the conclusion or adjusting the recommendation to local conditions.
Large Vision-Language Models—Qwen-VL (Bai et al., 2023), the GPT series (Achiam et al., 2023), LLaVA (Liu
et al., 2023), Flamingo (Alayrac et al., 2022)—represent a qualitative shift in capability. Unlike CNN classifiers, they
accept free-form diagnostic questions and, under favourable conditions, articulate some reasoning alongside an answer.
Agricultural VQA studies (Zhang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023) confirm that they produce richer outputs than label-only
pipelines. The difficulty is consistency: without any mechanism compelling the model to describe observable features
1https://github.com/CPJ-Agricultural/CPJ-Agricultural-Diagnosis
∗Corresponding Author: Tao Fang (taofang@mmc.edu.mo)
ORCID(s):
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 24
arXiv:2604.23701v1  [cs.CL]  26 Apr 2026

[Page 2]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
VQA
 "Question": "Is this a whea
t leaf or a corn leaf ?"
"Ground-Truth": "This is a 
wheat leaf."
Image-caption 
Enhancement 
Step1
Lightweight Model   
Generation  
two answers
LLM-as-a-Judge 
Answer Selection
Step2
Sep3
Ours CPJ Pipeline 
Answer：This is a  corn leaf.
 Optimized-Caption:Slender, linear blade with para
llel venation... orange-brown pustules (1-2 mm) sc
attered, covering ~15-20% area, early stage.
"Answer1": "Wheat leaf with rust... orange-brown 
pustules, early to moderate severity.",
"Answer2": "Wheat leaf—slender, linear, parallel 
venation; corn leaves are broader with different an
atomy.
      "Judge_Reasoning": "Answer 2 directly addres
ses crop identification via morphological features... 
Answer 1 focuses on disease description, which is 
less relevant to the question.(Answer 2 vs Answer 
1=4.2:3.5)."
Original VLM method
Lightweight Model
Generation  one 
answer
 <model is consistent with 
CPJ Step 2>
Summary:Unlike black-box VL
M methods that generate single, 
error-prone answers, CPJ achie
ves higher accuracy and transpa
rency via a structured 'perceptio
n-reasoning-judgment' 
pipeline that mirrors 
expert diagnostics.
Figure 1: Comparison between traditional VLM and Agri-CPJ framework on crop species identification. Traditional
VLMs provide direct but error-prone black-box predictions (incorrectly identifying wheat as corn, ✗), lacking explicit
reasoning chains. In contrast, Agri-CPJ delivers accurate diagnoses (✓) through a structured perception-reasoning-
judgment pipeline: (i) explicit feature extraction via optimized captions (e.g., “slender linear blade with parallel
venation”), (ii) dual complementary answer generation addressing morphological characteristics, and (iii) LLM-as-
a-Judge selection based on diagnostic validity. This expert-mimicking approach significantly enhances both accuracy
and interpretability.
before reaching a conclusion, the same image can yield correct or incorrect answers depending on subtle prompt
variation. Fig. 1 (top) shows a representative failure—a wheat leaf identified as corn, with no intermediate output that
would let a user locate where the reasoning broke down.
Fine-tuning on labelled agricultural data is the standard response to this, and several groups have pursued it (Cao
et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022). Three difficulties recur in practice. Annotated crop disease
datasets are costly to assemble and tend to reflect specific geographic and varietal conditions; Saadati et al. (2024)
document sharp accuracy drops when models encounter out-of-distribution species. Interpretability does not improve
either—gradient attribution maps reveal which image regions influenced a prediction, but not the observational logic
behind it.
Our goal was therefore a system that generalises across crop types and disease categories without retraining, and
that exposes its reasoning in a form that domain experts can scrutinise and, where necessary, dispute at the level of
individual observations.
There is a second, underappreciated problem with fine-tuning in agricultural deployment contexts. The model’s
knowledge is frozen at training time. When a previously unrecorded pathogen variant is first confirmed, or when a
grower presents a crop variety whose symptom presentation differs from anything in the training set, a fine-tuned
system requires retraining before it can respond reliably—a process demanding labelled data, compute infrastructure,
and engineering time that most cooperative extension services cannot readily mobilise. Prompting-based approaches
handle novel cases differently: a new crop type or disease can be incorporated as a few-shot example on the day it
is identified, without modifying any model parameter. In a slow-moving situation, that distinction is a convenience;
during an outbreak spreading faster than a retraining cycle can complete, it determines whether the diagnostic tool is
deployable at all.
Work on logic-driven anomaly detection (Jin et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025; Song et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2025) suggests
an alternative design principle: rather than optimising a model for a fixed task distribution, externalise the reasoning
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 24

[Page 3]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
 
step1：Generative Image-caption
 Enhancement Engine 
"Identify plant and disease types 
from images, describe symptoms, 
severity, and development stage 
concisely, while indicating health 
status or uncertainty when needed."
Few-shot Prompt 
 
VLM Generator
(Qwen、Gpt)
The photographed single strap-
shaped leaf is long and narrow with 
pronounced parallel veins. 
Numerous discrete lesions are...
 
Automated 
Evaluation Agent
(LLM-as-a-Judge ) 
"Rating":7,
"Reasoning":”Specificsymptoms ar
e well-detailed but lacks the host pl
ant and potential disease causes, lim
iting practicaluse.”
"Suggestions":Note diagnostic detai
ls such as pustule color/spore mass, 
symptoms on the leaf underside.
"Rating": 9,
“Enhanced-image-caption”:maize o
r other C4 grass (strap-leaf cereal). 
Symptoms: numerous discrete 2–8 
mm irregular–oval lesions concentr
ated mid‑blade....
image-caption
Evaluation Details
Enhanced-image-caption
 
step3：LLM-as-a-Judge Answer Selection
 
step2：Image-Caption-Optimized VQA 
Generation 
Task Dignosis:Few-shot Prompt 
Task Knowledge:Few-shot Prompt 
“Answer1”:Diagnosis summary- The pict
ured lesions are typical of rice blast (Mag
naporthe/ Pyricularia oryzae):..
“Answer2”:Rice blast management relies 
on integrated practices that reduce infecti
on and protect yields. Key measures:- Ho
st resistance...
Offering precise treatment 
recommendations, IPM strategies, 
and resistance management to 
ensure.
 
Lightweight 
Model
(Gwen-vl-chat,Gpt-
5-nano)
VQA
Crop type and disease identification 
and crop characterization with 
scientific accuracy.
“Choice": answer1,
"Reason": "Answer 1 is fa
r more detailed and scienti
fically precise — it correc
tly names the pathogen, d
escribes the disease 
biology and ...
“Score1": 4.9,
"Score2": 3.6,
 
Judging Module
          (Qwen、Gpt)
Agricultural expert evalua
tion system comparing tw
o diagnostic answers base
d on accuracy, completene
ss, specificity, practicality, 
and scientific validity usin
g structured scoring metri
cs.
Judgement Prompt 
Crop-Images
Figure 2: Overview of the “Agri-CPJ” pipeline for explainable Agri-Pest VQA, featuring three cohesive stages:
(i) Generative Explanational Captioning: A large vision-language model analyzes input crop disease images to
generate multi-angle descriptive captions detailing plant morphology, disease symptoms, severity levels, and diagnostic
uncertainties. Each generated caption is then passed through an iterative LLM-as-a-Judge refinement loop until it
satisfies quality thresholds for observational accuracy, completeness, and diagnostic neutrality. (ii) Task-Specific
Prompt-Based VQA Generation: The refined caption is combined with the original image and few-shot exemplars
to construct the VQA prompt; the model generates two candidate responses from distinct diagnostic perspectives—
one targeting disease recognition (crop identity, symptom characterisation, visible indicators) and one targeting
management guidance (treatment protocols, prevention measures). (iii) LLM-as-a-Judge Answer Selection: A
more capable LLM scores both candidates against a reference answer using multiple criteria (factual correctness,
completeness, specificity, practical applicability), selects the stronger response, and returns an explicit rationale
documenting the basis for the selection.
so that each inference step can be independently inspected and corrected. Agri-CPJ 1 applies this principle to crop
disease. Between a leaf photograph and a diagnostic conclusion lies a gap. In most current systems that gap is crossed by
a single forward pass with no accessible intermediate state. We require instead that it be traversed through a text record
of morphological observations—one a practitioner can read, question, or correct before accepting any downstream
answer.
The framework we propose, Agri-CPJ, has three stages. A large LVLM opens by reading the input image
and writing a structured caption—covering morphology, symptoms, severity, and uncertainty—while deliberately
withholding crop and disease names to avoid encoding a premature label. That caption is critiqued by an LLM judge
and rewritten if it falls short of a quality threshold. The refined caption then travels alongside the original image to a
lightweight VQA model, which produces two candidate answers from different diagnostic angles: one disease-focused,
one crop-focused. A second judge LLM scores both against a reference and picks the stronger one, documenting why.
Fig. 1 (bottom) shows the result: the wheat/corn confusion is corrected because the right morphological evidence was
on the table before any label was attached.
CPJ adjusts to new cases through the context window: a newly confirmed disease variant or crop type enters the
few-shot exemplars on the same day it is identified, without modifying any model parameter. The ceiling, however, is set
1This manuscript substantially extends Our Prior ICASSP 2026 paper Zhang et al. (2026) from 4 to 20+ pages, presenting a well-structured
and principled framework, extensive experiments, and deeper insights.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 24

[Page 4]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
by the vision encoder’s perceptual resolution. For photographs taken during the earliest infection stages—when surface
symptoms are minimal or ambiguous—even a carefully constructed caption cannot supply discriminative information
the image does not contain.
The interpretability claim merits careful statement. Gradient-based attribution maps and attention visualisations
indicate which image regions a model weighted—they do not describe what the model understood those regions
to mean, and most field practitioners lack the background to translate pixel-level saliency scores into agronomic
reasoning. CPJ operates on different ground. The structured caption is a text document: a plant pathologist can read
it, assess whether the morphological observations are accurate, and identify specific errors before examining any
downstream answer. Both candidate responses and the judge’s selection rationale are similarly readable. A practitioner
who disagrees with the system’s conclusion can point to the particular caption observation that seems wrong, argue
that one candidate better fits the field situation, or note that the judge’s preference conflicts with local experience—
and do all of this without understanding how the underlying model weights are configured. Saliency maps offer no
equivalent affordance. A practitioner cannot point to a specific pixel cluster that caused a wrong prediction and explain,
in observational terms, why it should have been read differently. In Agri-CPJ, the caption is that target: disagreement
has a named location and a readable description.
The numbers support these claims across both benchmarks. On CDDMBench (Liu et al., 2024), the GPT-5-Nano
backbone paired with GPT-5-mini-generated captions yields +22.7 pp in disease classification accuracy and +19.5
points on the knowledge QA sub-task relative to no-caption zero-shot baselines. Evaluated without modification on
AgMMU-MCQs (Gauba et al., 2025)—a structurally distinct multiple-choice format spanning five agricultural task
categories—the full CPJ configuration (Caption + Few-shot + LLM-as-a-Judge) achieves 77.84% with GPT-5-Nano
and 64.54% with Qwen-VL-Chat, placing it at or above most open-source models of comparable parameter scale.
This paper makes three contributions. First, we present Agri-CPJ, a training-free few-shot pipeline in which
visual reasoning is externalised as an iteratively refined caption before any diagnostic question is answered, enabling
practitioners to trace a conclusion back to the specific image observations that supported it. Second, the VQA stage
generates two candidate responses from complementary diagnostic viewpoints, with caption prompts withholding crop
and disease names to suppress premature label commitment; a multi-criteria LLM judge selects between candidates
and produces an explicit rationale. Third, we report controlled experiments on CDDMBench and AgMMU-MCQs
across two backbone architectures, together with a human validation study in which LLM judge selections agreed with
expert plant pathologist assessments at 𝜅= 0.88.
2. Related Work
2.1. Agricultural Vision-Language Models
Agricultural image analysis has followed the broad trajectory of computer vision: hand-crafted descriptors (Kumar
and Kaur, 2015) gave way to convolutional architectures, which have since been largely superseded by Vision
Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and language-aligned backbones (Yadav and Kaushik, 2023); Zhu et al. (2024)
survey this transition in detail. Within-distribution accuracy has improved substantially—purpose-built models such
as AgriGPT-VL (Yang et al., 2025) and AgriVLM (Yu and Lin, 2024) report figures above 90% on their own test splits,
achieved through parameter-efficient fine-tuning. What benchmark tables tend to leave unreported is cross-distribution
behaviour: whether the same model holds up when applied to a crop variety absent from training, or to field photographs
taken under lighting and soil conditions that differ from the dataset.
Sensor fusion attempts to address the contextual shallowness of image-only methods: Rice-Fusion (Patil and
Kumar, 2022) pairs leaf images with agro-meteorological readings, and Lu et al. (2024) incorporate image, text,
and sensor streams together. For knowledge breadth, Agri-LLaVA (Wang et al., 2024) covers 221 pest and disease
categories via 400K training entries. The closest precedent to our approach is WDLM (Zhang et al., 2024), which
generates step-by-step explanations for wheat disease rather than terminal labels—though it still requires disease-
specific fine-tuning and does not support iterative refinement of those explanations.
The benchmark picture is less flattering than the model papers suggest. AgroBench (Shinoda et al., 2025) finds
that more than half of all VLM errors come from missing domain knowledge, not poor vision. AgEval (Arshad et al.,
2025) and VL-PAW (Yu et al., 2025) show modest few-shot and fine-tuning gains, but hallucination persists (Ren
et al., 2025) and truly lightweight deployable models are still rare (Vu et al., 2025). The availability of large-scale
datasets—MIRAGE (Dongre et al., 2025), CDDMBench (Liu et al., 2024), AgMMU (Gauba et al., 2025)—has helped
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 24

[Page 5]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
in-domain results (Yang et al., 2024; Ranario and Earles, 2025; Su et al., 2022), but models trained on them tend to
overfit narrow distributions (Saadati et al., 2024) and rarely say why they reached a conclusion.
2.2. Explainable AI in Vision-Language Models
The interpretability problem in VLMs is older than VLMs themselves. Gradient-based attribution methods—
Shapley values (Dinga and Schiewe, 2025), LRP/LIME (Kamal et al., 2025), GEST (Masala and Leordeanu, 2025),
VALE (Natarajan and Nambiar, 2024)—were the default for years. The objection to them, which we share, is not that
they are technically wrong but that a heat map over pixel regions is not the same thing as a justification a domain
expert can follow. A plant pathologist does not think in gradients; they describe what they observe and reason from
those descriptions.
Chain-of-Thought methods move in the right direction. Multimodal-CoT (Zhang et al., 2023) separates rationale
generation from answer inference, which already reduces hallucination measurably. DDCoT (Zheng et al., 2023a) goes
further by splitting the reasoning work between language and vision submodules. ICoT (Gao et al., 2025) interleaves
visual and textual tokens step by step, achieving impressive results but at considerable architectural cost. CPJ takes a
structurally more direct route: the visual observation is externalised as a standalone text document before any question-
answering step is initiated. Because this caption exists as a discrete, human-readable artifact, it can be reviewed,
corrected, or substituted independently of the underlying model—without any architectural modification.
Among retrieval-augmented methods, REVEAL (Hu et al., 2023) is the closest in motivation: it grounds model
outputs in a curated external knowledge base so that responses can be traced to specific sources. The operational
gap relative to Agri-CPJ is that REVEAL depends on constructing and maintaining that knowledge base prior to
deployment, whereas our captions are produced directly from the input image at inference time and require no external
corpus. CoT-VLA (Zhao et al., 2025) applies a comparable reasoning-before-action principle to robotic manipulation,
providing evidence that externalised intermediate representations confer benefits across task domains beyond visual
classification.
2.3. LLM-as-a-Judge for Quality Assurance
LLM-based evaluation has accumulated a well-documented set of failure modes. MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023b)
provided an early systematic characterisation: overall human–LLM agreement exceeded 80%, but two biases emerged
consistently—position bias, whereby judges assign higher scores to whichever candidate appears first in the prompt,
and verbosity bias, whereby longer responses receive preferential treatment regardless of content. JudgeLM (Zhu et al.,
2023) reduces both through swap augmentation during judge fine-tuning. PolyVis (Padarha et al., 2025) introduces a
more fundamental concern: across multilingual and cross-domain settings, judge reliability degrades in ways that model
scale alone does not explain, indicating that evaluation quality is contingent on domain alignment rather than general
capability.
For multimodal settings, reliability is less settled. Chen et al. (2024) show LLM judges are more consistent at
pairwise comparison than absolute scoring; Agri-CPJ uses pairwise comparison partly for this reason. Prometheus-
Vision (Lee et al., 2024) introduced open-source multimodal judging with configurable rubrics, and Woodpecker (Yin
et al., 2024) demonstrated that hallucinations can be corrected through staged validation without any additional training.
Shi et al. (2025) measured scoring gaps of up to five points from human raters, with verbosity bias severe enough
to change the selected answer. We encountered this in early Agri-CPJ runs: the judge consistently preferred longer
answers even when shorter ones were more factually accurate. Removing response length from the scoring criteria
brought verbosity-driven misselections from roughly 12% down to 5%.
3. Methodology
Rather than building an end-to-end model, Agri-CPJ decomposes diagnosis into three stages that a human expert
might recognize: look carefully at the image and describe what you see; reason over those observations to form
candidate answers; then critically compare the candidates and pick the stronger one. Each stage is implemented by
prompting off-the-shelf LVLMs, so no gradient updates are ever required.
3.1. Framework Design Philosophy
Examining incorrect diagnoses produced by baseline LVLMs, we found a recurring pattern: the model had
frequently encoded relevant visual information—lesion shape, pustule colour, venation geometry—but had not
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 24

[Page 6]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
committed those observations to any retrievable representation before generating an answer. The diagnostic error was
therefore not a failure of visual processing per se, but a failure to constrain the reasoning with explicit observational
evidence. This finding motivated the central architectural decision in Agri-CPJ: the visual observation must be
externalised as a text artifact, accessible to both the downstream model and any human reviewer, before any diagnostic
question is posed.
A separate problem emerged once the captioning stage was in place. A single VQA response tends to concentrate
on whichever diagnostic dimension the model finds most tractable—disease identification at the expense of crop
morphology, or the reverse. Generating two responses from distinct viewpoints before any selection step addressed
this: even without the judge, the pair jointly covered substantially more of the relevant diagnostic information than any
individual response. The computational overhead is limited to one additional VQA call per query, and the improvement
in information coverage was consistent across development experiments.
The third requirement was auditability at the point of decision. When a practitioner disagrees with a system output,
the disagreement should be articulable—directed at a specific observation in the caption, a specific claim in one
candidate answer, or a specific aspect of the judge’s scoring rationale—rather than expressed only as a general distrust
of the result. Every Agri-CPJ output therefore includes the refined caption with its quality score, both candidate answers
with individual scores, and the judge’s written justification for its selection. Each of these components constitutes a
locatable point of intervention. The architecture is defined by these three structural commitments: externalised captions,
dual-perspective answer generation, and scored selection accompanied by an explicit rationale.
The distinction from end-to-end approaches is clearest by contrast. A fine-tuned model achieving strong benchmark
accuracy has merged observation, inference, and output into a single forward pass; when it errs, no intermediate
representation survives that a reviewer could examine. Chain-of-thought prompting moves closer to what Agri-CPJ
does—it generates a reasoning trace before the final answer—but the trace and the answer are produced together
in one decoding sequence, which allows the reasoning to be constructed retrospectively around a conclusion already
implicit in the generation. Agri-CPJ separates these steps in a harder sense: the caption is generated and quality-checked
before the diagnostic question is even presented to the VQA model, so the observation stage is genuinely prior to and
independent of the reasoning stage. An error in the caption does not propagate silently; it is visible in the text before
any answer is produced.
One operational consequence of this design is caption reusability. Since the caption is produced before any question
is answered, a single refined caption can serve multiple subsequent queries about the same image. In a multi-turn
diagnostic session—where a grower uploads a photograph and asks in sequence about disease identity, harvest safety,
and appropriate fungicide—the iterative refinement step runs once and the resulting caption is passed to the VQA and
judge stages for each question independently. Given that caption refinement accounts for the majority of API cost per
session (it requires the vision-capable model and potentially multiple iterations), amortising it across several queries
substantially reduces the effective per-question cost in real deployment scenarios.
3.2. Image Interpretability and Caption Enhancement
Agricultural pathology relies on a specific diagnostic vocabulary—chlorotic halo geometry, lesion boundary
regularity, pustule colour and distribution—that sits at some distance from the feature representations computed by
general-purpose vision encoders. When a model proceeds directly from pixel input to a disease label, this vocabulary
gap is bridged implicitly inside a single forward pass, and any error in that translation has no externally visible form.
An explicit caption interposes a translatable record: the model commits its visual interpretation to text before any
diagnostic step, and that text can be checked against field observation, corrected if inaccurate, or replaced with an
expert-authored description without touching the downstream architecture.
In our validation, agronomists who ultimately disagreed with a final diagnosis frequently confirmed that the
caption’s morphological description was accurate. This indicated that the error resided in the interpretive step—how
the model moved from observed morphology to a pathogen class—rather than in the visual encoding itself. That is
a more tractable failure mode: correcting a misinterpretation in a text document is substantially more accessible than
diagnosing and adjusting a hidden-layer representation.
One prompt engineering decision required substantially more iteration than anticipated: captions are constrained
to exclude crop species names and disease labels entirely. The rationale is that even indirect diagnostic vocabulary—
phrases such as “distribution consistent with a biotrophic pathogen” or “lesion morphology typical of late blight”—
effectively anchors the downstream VQA model to a pathogen class before it has examined the full observational
evidence, introducing a form of label leakage through the caption channel. Arriving at prompt formulations that
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 24

[Page 7]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
reliably elicited morphology-focused, nomenclature-free descriptions took approximately twelve revision rounds
across development. Even with the final prompts, roughly 35% of first-pass captions in our validation set carried at
least one implicit diagnostic cue; the quality-gating refinement loop was specifically designed to detect and remove
these.
Caption generation is formalised in Eq. (1): a large vision-language model receiving image 𝐼alongside few-shot
prompt 𝑃few produces an initial description 𝐶0. The exemplars in 𝑃few are chosen to demonstrate the target caption
register—precise morphological observation, symptom coverage, severity estimation—while scrupulously avoiding
any crop species name or disease label, so that the debiasing constraint is enforced through demonstration rather than
instruction alone.
𝐶0 = VLM(𝐼, 𝑃few),
(1)
Quality control happens through multi-dimensional scoring across 𝑘dimensions = {𝑑1, … , 𝑑𝑘} covering
accuracy, completeness, specificity, relevance, and clarity:
𝑠(𝐶) = 1
𝑘
𝑘
∑
𝑖=1
𝑤𝑖⋅𝑑𝑖(𝐶),
(2)
Captions that fall below a threshold 𝜏go back to the VLM with targeted feedback (⋅) on the specific deficiencies:
𝐶∗=
{
𝐶0,
if 𝑠(𝐶0) ≥𝜏,
VLM(𝐼, (𝐶0)),
otherwise.
(3)
We set 𝜏= 8.0∕10.0 across all experiments. Raising it to 8.5 tightened quality slightly but roughly doubled the average
number of refinement iterations and the associated API cost, so we kept the lower threshold. In the rare cases where
the loop does not converge within 𝑁max iterations, we use the best caption produced so far rather than failing the query
entirely. Complete system prompts and few-shot exemplars for all three stages are provided in Appendix A.
3.3. Explanational Caption-Optimized VQA
A single VQA pass over the refined caption tends to anchor on whichever diagnostic dimension the model finds
easiest—often the disease label, at the expense of crop morphology or management guidance. Generating two candidate
answers from explicitly different viewpoints is a simple way to guard against this. Formally, for viewpoints 1 and 2:
𝐴(𝑖) = VQA(𝐼, 𝐶∗, 𝑄∣𝑖),
𝑖∈{1, 2},
(4)
so that the candidate set becomes = {𝐴(1), 𝐴(2)} = VQA(𝑋, 𝑃task), where 𝑋= (𝐼, 𝐶∗, 𝑄).
= {𝐴(1), 𝐴(2)} = VQA(𝑋, 𝑃task),
(5)
The specific viewpoint split we settled on is disease-focused vs. crop-focused for recognition questions, and treatment-
protocol vs. disease-mechanism for knowledge questions. We tried several other pairings in preliminary experiments—
e.g. severity-focused vs. management-focused—but found that the disease/crop split gave the most complementary
outputs on CDDMBench; the two answers rarely overlapped heavily, which gave the judge a meaningful choice.
Agricultural diagnosis is structurally multi-dimensional. A query about a diseased maize leaf typically requires
both a pathogen identification and an assessment of the crop’s developmental stage and associated susceptibility—two
perspectives that draw on distinct portions of the caption content. The disease-focused candidate reasons from symptom
patterns toward pathogen class and treatment protocol; the crop-focused candidate reasons from morphological identity
toward growth stage and vulnerability profile. Generating these two paths separately, rather than producing a single
response that conflates them, ensures that the judge evaluates candidates with genuinely different information content
rather than candidates that differ mainly in surface phrasing.
The viewpoint pairing differs by task category. For recognition tasks—determining what organism or condition is
present—the two candidates address: (i) disease or pest identification, emphasising lesion morphology, symptom sever-
ity, and characteristic distribution patterns; and (ii) crop identification, emphasising plant architecture, variety-specific
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 24

[Page 8]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
features, and structural markers. For knowledge tasks—explaining mechanisms or recommending management—the
pairing shifts to: (i) treatment, prevention, and integrated control strategies with specified methods and timing; and (ii)
disease aetiology, pathogen lifecycle, and environmental conditions governing spread. This split maintains architectural
consistency across task types while directing each perspective toward the information most relevant to that category
of question.
Few-shot prompting populates 𝑃task with in-context exemplars = {(𝐼𝑗, 𝐶𝑗, 𝑄𝑗, 𝐴𝑗)}𝑛
𝑗=1:
𝑃(𝐴∣𝐼, 𝐶, 𝑄, ) ∝𝑃(𝐴∣𝐼, 𝐶, 𝑄) ⋅
𝑛
∏
𝑗=1
𝑃(𝐴𝑗∣𝐼𝑗, 𝐶𝑗, 𝑄𝑗).
(6)
We evaluate zero- through five-shot settings in the ablation; three-shot gave the best accuracy-cost trade-off for Qwen-
VL-Chat, while GPT-5-Nano was largely insensitive to shot count once captions were in place. The difference is
meaningful: for Qwen-VL-Chat, each additional shot up to three brings consistent classification gains, and the model
appears to be extracting visual pattern guidance from the exemplar images rather than just formatting cues from
the exemplar answers. For GPT-5-Nano, the few-shot exemplars primarily set the response format; the reasoning
content comes from the caption. This asymmetry suggests that the optimal shot count is architecture-dependent, and
practitioners working with vision-centric models should budget more exemplars than those working with reasoning-
focused models.
3.4. LLM-as-a-Judge Answer Selection
Once the two candidates are ready, a judge LLM scores each against a reference 𝐴ref across criteria Ω =
{𝜔1, … , 𝜔𝑚}:
Score(𝐴) =
1
|Ω|
∑
𝜔∈Ω
𝑔𝜔(𝐴, 𝐴ref),
(7)
where each 𝑔𝜔∈[0, 1]. The criteria differ by task type. For recognition, we weight pathogen identification correctness,
symptom description precision, and crop identification accuracy. For knowledge-type questions, treatment specificity
and practical actionability are incorporated as additional scoring dimensions. Response length is not scored. An earlier
version of the rubric included it by default; we removed it after tracing approximately 12% of misselections to verbosity-
driven preferences, consistent with Shi et al. (2025). Full scoring rubrics for both task types are detailed in Appendix B.
Selecting the evaluation criteria required iterative refinement. The initial criterion set was broad but internally
redundant—ten dimensions that included both “factual accuracy” and “correctness” as separate items, which the
judge consistently assigned near-identical scores, contributing noise rather than discrimination. Reducing to five or
six orthogonal dimensions per task type stabilised the scoring distribution and reduced variance in selections across
different judge prompt formulations. The critical structural decision was separating domain-specific criteria—pathogen
identification accuracy, crop morphological correctness—from generic writing quality criteria such as completeness
and clarity. Without this separation, a response that misidentified the pathogen but was well-structured could outscore
a technically accurate but less fluent answer. Since an agronomist’s primary concern is whether the identified organism
is correct, not whether the prose is polished, the scoring weights are calibrated accordingly.
The judge’s output is a quadruple ⟨𝐴∗, 𝑠∗, 𝑠−, 𝑅⟩, where 𝑅is a brief rationale explaining why 𝐴∗was preferred:
Judgment(𝐴(1), 𝐴(2)) = ⟨𝐴∗, 𝑠∗, 𝑠−, 𝑅⟩,
(8)
GPT-5 serves as the judge in text-only mode: it receives the structured caption, the diagnostic question, the reference
answer, and both candidates, but not the original image. This restriction prevents vision-side confounds—where the
judge’s own image interpretation might override the caption-grounded reasoning—from influencing the selection. In
informal feedback sessions, several agronomists indicated that the rationale 𝑅was the component they examined first,
treating it analogously to a colleague’s written justification before acting on any recommendation.
𝐴∗= arg max
𝐴∈Score(𝐴).
(9)
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 24

[Page 9]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Algorithm 1 Agri-CPJ Framework: Complete Inference Pipeline
Require: Crop disease image 𝐼, Diagnostic query 𝑄, Quality threshold 𝜏, Max iterations 𝑁max
Ensure: Final diagnosis answer 𝐴∗, Evaluation report 𝑅
1: // Stage 1: Generative Explanational Captioning
2: Generate initial caption: 𝐶0 ←VLM(𝐼, 𝑃few)
3: Initialize iteration counter: 𝑛←0
4: while 𝑛< 𝑁max do
5:
Compute quality score: 𝑠(𝐶0) ←1
𝑘
∑𝑘
𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖⋅𝑑𝑖(𝐶0)
6:
if 𝑠(𝐶0) ≥𝜏then
7:
break
8:
end if
9:
Generate critique feedback: (𝐶0) ←LLM-Judge(𝐶0, )
10:
Refine caption: 𝐶0 ←VLM(𝐼, (𝐶0))
11:
𝑛←𝑛+ 1
12: end while
13: Obtain optimized caption: 𝐶∗←𝐶0
14:
15: // Stage 2: Task-Specific Prompt-Based VQA Generation
16: Generate disease-focused answer:
17:
𝐴(1) ←VQA(𝐼, 𝐶∗, 𝑄∣disease)
18: Generate crop-focused answer:
19:
𝐴(2) ←VQA(𝐼, 𝐶∗, 𝑄∣crop)
20:
21: // Stage 3: LLM-as-a-Judge Answer Selection
22: for 𝑖∈{1, 2} do
23:
Evaluate multi-dimensional score:
24:
Score(𝐴(𝑖)) ←
1
|Ω|
∑
𝜔∈Ω 𝑔𝜔(𝐴(𝑖), 𝐴ref)
25: end for
26: Select best answer: 𝐴∗←arg max𝐴∈{𝐴(1),𝐴(2)} Score(𝐴)
27: Generate evaluation rationale:
28:
𝑅←GenerateRationale(𝐴(1), 𝐴(2), 𝐴∗)
29: return 𝐴∗, 𝑅
Agreement between judge selections and human expert choices is quantified using Cohen’s Kappa:
𝜅= 𝑃𝑜−𝑃𝑒
1 −𝑃𝑒
,
(10)
where 𝑃𝑜denotes observed agreement and 𝑃𝑒the agreement expected by chance. The human validation study detailed
in Section 4.5 yields 𝜅= 0.88, exceeding the > 0.8 threshold that convention associates with substantial inter-rater
agreement. Algorithm 1 presents the complete Agri-CPJ inference procedure.
Algorithm 1 gives the complete Agri-CPJ inference procedure. The iterative caption refinement loop gates entry
into dual-answer generation and judge-based selection. In total, a single Agri-CPJ inference call involves three to five
LLM API requests depending on how many refinement rounds the caption requires—a non-trivial cost per query, but
one that we argue is warranted given the stakes of agricultural decision-making.
The algorithm does not update any model weights, store state between queries, or require a GPU at inference
time—the pipeline runs entirely on API calls. From a deployment standpoint, this property matters more than it might
appear. A cooperative extension service needs only API credentials and a thin wrapper script; there is no model-serving
infrastructure to maintain, no GPU allocation to manage, and no dependency on a fixed model checkpoint. Updating to
a better caption generator requires changing a single configuration parameter. The stateless architecture removes a class
of operational overhead—version management, hardware provisioning, runtime monitoring—that routinely prevents
research systems from reaching production use.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 24

[Page 10]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
4. Experiments and Analysis
4.1. Experimental Setup
Two benchmarks stress different aspects of the framework. CDDMBench (Liu et al., 2024) is purpose-built for
crop disease diagnosis: 3,000 test images covering crop and disease type identification (keyword-matching accuracy)
plus a 20-question knowledge QA set spanning 10 disease types scored by GPT-4 on a 1–10 scale normalised
to 100 points. We follow the original evaluation protocol without modification. AgMMU-MCQs (Gauba et al.,
2025) is deliberately broader—767 four-option multiple-choice questions drawn from 116,231 authentic dialogues
between growers and USDA-authorised Cooperative Extension experts, covering disease identification (139 questions),
insect/pest identification (144), management instructions (161), species identification (145), and symptom description
(178). The format shift from open-ended to multiple-choice was unplanned on our side; we ran the same Agri-CPJ
pipeline on both, which made AgMMU a useful proxy for out-of-distribution generalisation.
We chose CDDMBench and AgMMU for complementary reasons. CDDMBench’s 3,000-image scale and explicit
disease-labelling task gives a clean signal for measuring whether captions help with specific identification, while
the knowledge QA component tests whether the framework can support open-ended reasoning rather than just
classification. AgMMU’s multiple-choice format, broader scope, and origin in real grower–extension expert dialogues
provide a very different evaluation surface: the questions were not designed to test any particular model, and the correct
answers reflect practical agricultural knowledge rather than benchmark-construction choices. The fact that we did not
adapt the pipeline between benchmarks—same prompts, same hyperparameters—makes the AgMMU results a genuine
test of how well the approach generalises rather than how well we tuned it.
For CDDMBench, our comparison points are: the original Qwen-VL-Chat (7B) zero-shot result from Liu et al.
(2024) (28.40% crop, 5.00% disease, 41 QA), which serves as the published anchor; our own independently reproduced
Qwen-VL-Chat baseline (28.55% crop, 5.80% disease, 41.5 QA), run to verify experimental conditions match the
benchmark protocol; and a GPT-5-Nano zero-shot baseline we established ourselves (47.00% crop, 11.00% disease,
65 QA). For AgMMU-MCQs, we compare against the full leaderboard reported in Gauba et al. (2025). Proprietary
models: GPT-4o (85.25%), Gemini 1.5 Pro (80.42%), Claude 3 Haiku (62.00%). Open-source models: LLaMA-3.2
(73.32%), LLaVA-OneVision-8B (72.53%), LLaVA-1.5-13B (66.73%), LLaVA-NeXT-8B (66.71%), Cambrian-8B
(65.81%), LLaVA-1.5-7B (64.16%), VILA1.5-13B (63.00%), Qwen-VL-7B (62.34%), InternVL2-8B (60.17%).
CDDMBench classification accuracy is determined by keyword-matching: the model’s response must contain the
correct crop or disease name as it appears in the ground-truth annotation. Knowledge QA is scored by GPT-4 on a
1–10 scale (normalised to 100 points) based on usefulness, relevance, and factual accuracy; we follow the original
protocol without modification. For AgMMU, we use exact-match accuracy against the option label (A, B, C, or D).
Cohen’s Kappa (𝜅) is computed for the human validation study to quantify agreement between LLM judge selections
and expert choices.
Caption generation used Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct and GPT-5-mini, both processed through the same iterative
refinement loop at 𝜏= 8∕10. For CDDMBench, the caption prompt instructs the model to describe plant morphology,
observable disease symptoms, lesion severity and spatial distribution, and any diagnostic uncertainty—without naming
the crop species or disease. The same debiasing constraint and pipeline ran on AgMMU without modification.
Qwen-VL-Chat parameters: temperature 0.5, max_tokens 400, top_p 0.8, max_retries 3. GPT-5-Nano parameters:
reasoning_effort=medium, verbosity=low, 30 s timeout, max_retries 3. These hyperparameters were fixed on a short
validation run and not adjusted per-task or per-dataset.
On AgMMU we evaluate four incremental configurations to isolate each component’s contribution: (i) zero-shot
without captions, as a direct LVLM baseline; (ii) zero-shot with quality-optimised captions, isolating the captioning
effect alone; (iii) three-shot prompting with caption-enhanced exemplars randomly drawn from the training split; (iv)
the full Agri-CPJ pipeline with dual-answer generation and judge selection. The judge was GPT-5 in text-only mode
at temperature 0, with no image access during the selection step to avoid vision-side confounds. All API calls go
through LangChain (Annam et al., 2025; Topsakal and Akinci, 2023; Dave et al., 2025) at temperature=0 throughout for
reproducibility. The JSON data schema for each pipeline stage, including field definitions and an end-to-end example,
is provided in Appendix C.
4.2. Main Results on CDDMBench
Table 1 summarises performance on CDDMBench’s diagnosis and knowledge QA tasks for both VQA models
across caption strategies.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 24

[Page 11]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Table 1: Performance comparison on CDDMBench dataset. Baseline methods use zero-shot without caption enhance-
ment. Our Agri-CPJ framework progressively adds optimized captions, few-shot prompting, and LLM-as-a-Judge
selection. Best results for each model in bold.
Model
Method
Crop Classification
Disease Classification
Knowledge QA
Caption Generator: Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct
Qwen-VL-Chat
Zero-shot (Liu et al., 2024) Baseline
28.40%
5.00%
41
Zero-shot (Our Baseline)
28.55%
5.80%
41.5
+ Caption (Optimized)
29.30%
12.10%
46.5
+ Few-shot
53.39%
24.49%
50
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
54.90%
25.39%
51
GPT-5-Nano
Zero-shot (Our Baseline)
47.00%
11.00%
65
+ Caption (Optimized)
51.20%
31.40%
75.5
+ Few-shot
50.10%
31.00%
74.5
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
53.20%
32.80%
76
Caption Generator: GPT-5-mini
Qwen-VL-Chat
+ Caption (Optimized)
28.99%
7.17%
44
+ Few-shot
51.00%
14.50%
49
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
51.60%
14.80%
49.5
GPT-5-Nano
Zero-shot (Our Baseline)
47.00%
11.00%
65
+ Caption (Optimized)
60.30%
31.60%
84
+ Few-shot
58.90%
29.80%
76
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
63.38%
33.70%
84.5
With GPT-5-mini captions, GPT-5-Nano reaches 63.38% crop accuracy, 33.70% disease accuracy, and 84.5 on
knowledge QA—gains of +22.7 pp and +19.5 points over the no-caption baseline. Qwen2.5-VL-72B captions lag
behind for this model (53.20% crop, 32.80% disease, 76 QA) but still represent a large improvement over the
uncaptioned starting point. The performance gap between the two caption generators did not follow the expected
direction: Qwen2.5-VL-72B’s larger parameter count did not translate into better downstream accuracy for GPT-5-
Nano.
The judge stage contributes a consistent terminal increment for both model configurations. Selected answers
averaged 4.9/5.0 under the multi-criteria rubric, against 3.6/5.0 for the rejected alternatives—a 1.3-point gap that
indicates the judge is discriminating on substantive quality rather than surface features or positional artefacts.
The two models exhibit substantially different response profiles across framework components, suggesting that the
gains arise through distinct mechanisms rather than a single shared process. For GPT-5-Nano, the dominant gain tracks
caption quality: the +22.7 pp improvement in disease classification corresponds closely with the semantic grounding
supplied by the caption, and appending few-shot demonstrations actually reduces crop classification accuracy by 1.40
pp. This pattern is consistent with a reasoning-oriented model for which well-formed captions already supply sufficient
domain grounding, and for which in-context demonstrations introduce distributional noise rather than useful signal.
Qwen-VL-Chat presents the inverse case. Captions alone shift disease classification by only +6.30 pp, but adding three-
shot exemplars stacks a further +24.84 pp on crop classification. That trajectory fits a model that extracts visual pattern
alignment cues from demonstrated images rather than performing explicit verbal reasoning over caption content—a
meaningfully different mechanism with distinct implications for deployment in settings where curating high-quality
exemplars carries a cost.
The choice of caption generator also matters, and the direction of the effect depends on the downstream model.
For GPT-5-Nano, GPT-5-mini captions outperform Qwen2.5-VL-72B captions by +10.18 pp in crop classification
despite the Qwen2.5-VL-72B model being substantially larger. Inspecting individual captions, GPT-5-mini outputs
more precise botanical vocabulary with fewer hedging phrases—the difference between “possibly consistent with
fungal damage” and “orange-brown urediospore masses on the abaxial surface near major veins” is the difference
between a cue that focuses reasoning and one that obscures it. For Qwen-VL-Chat, the relationship reverses: Qwen2.5-
VL-72B captions produce better downstream results, suggesting the vision-centric model may be responding to stylistic
or structural patterns in the caption rather than its semantic content alone.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 24

[Page 12]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
4.3. Caption Impact Analysis
We isolate the contribution of caption enhancement by comparing model performance with and without it across
all four model-generator combinations.
Caption enhancement improves all three metrics in every combination we tested. The absolute magnitudes—+22.7
pp on disease classification for GPT-5-Nano, +23.05 pp on crop classification for Qwen-VL-Chat—are large enough
to shift practical deployment decisions, and they arise without any parameter update.
The 𝑅2 = 0.112 correlation between caption quality score and downstream accuracy (Fig. 3) is statistically
real but modest, indicating that quality is a contributing factor rather than the sole determinant. Decomposing by
task reveals an asymmetry: the correlation is strongest in disease classification, whereas crop classification tolerates
lower-quality captions more gracefully—consistent with the observation that gross morphological features sufficient
for crop identification are often captured even by imprecise descriptions. The most diagnostically valuable caption
content is domain-specific terminology for pathogen-characteristic textures: rust pustule colouration, powdery mildew
distribution patterns, lesion boundary geometry. A caption reading “leaves showing some discolouration” satisfies
surface-level quality criteria but contributes little discriminative signal; one reading “orange-brown urediospore masses
concentrated on the abaxial surface near major veins” provides the anchoring that downstream reasoning requires.
Certain failure cases are worth noting separately. Where most of the leaf surface is already necrotic, captions
describe the extent of tissue damage with reasonable accuracy but cannot distinguish between candidate pathogens,
because the morphological features that would permit discrimination have been obliterated by disease progression.
In such cases, a high-quality caption and a correct diagnosis do not co-occur reliably: the caption may accurately
characterise the extent of necrosis while providing no basis for pathogen attribution.
The performance gains are consistent with the architectural account of how captions help. Without captioning, a
VLM must extract relevant visual features, translate them into domain terminology, and reason toward a diagnosis—
three operations collapsed into one forward pass with no intermediate record. Captioning decouples the first operation:
the model produces a text description of what it observes, and that description can be verified against domain knowledge
before any diagnostic step proceeds. For GPT-5-Nano, the +22.7 pp disease classification gain from GPT-5-mini
captions reflects the difference between a reasoning-capable model receiving well-grounded input versus one that
must infer domain vocabulary directly from pixels; the accuracy gap traces to the quality of observation, not to any
deficiency in the downstream reasoning process.
4.4. Ablation Study
We now quantify how much each Agri-CPJ component contributes by adding them one at a time under the Qwen2.5-
VL-72B-Instruct caption setting.
As shown in Fig. 4, progressive gains are visible for both models, though the per-component contribution profile
differs in ways that illuminate the underlying mechanisms.
Raw, unrefined captions already produce measurable change. Qwen-VL-Chat gains +6.20 pp on disease classifica-
tion and +4.0 points on knowledge QA, while crop classification shifts by only +0.05 pp. GPT-5-Nano responds more
strongly at the same stage (+19.20 pp disease, +7.5 QA), consistent with reasoning-oriented architectures deriving
greater benefit from verbal descriptions—even imperfect ones—than vision-centric models that rely more heavily on
direct image encoding.
Iterative quality refinement adds smaller but systematic increments: approximately +0.70/+0.10/+1.0 for Qwen-
VL-Chat and +2.30/+1.20/+3.0 for GPT-5-Nano across the three reported metrics. The absolute magnitude is modest,
but the function of this step is distinct from merely improving caption fluency. Quality-gating removes near-diagnostic
vocabulary that inadvertently encodes ground-truth label information, preserving the integrity of the downstream
reasoning process. In our validation set, 35% of first-pass captions contained at least one such implicit cue; the
refinement loop resolved these in 1.8 iterations on average.
Few-shot prompting produces Qwen-VL-Chat’s largest single-component improvement: +22.50 pp on crop
classification, +19.40 pp on disease classification, and +7.8 points on knowledge QA at three shots. The magnitude
and distribution of these gains fit a model that uses demonstrated image–caption–answer triples to learn a visual-to-
text alignment function, rather than performing compositional reasoning over caption content—a structurally different
process from the mechanism driving GPT-5-Nano’s response to captions. GPT-5-Nano is largely unaffected by shot
count, consistent with reasoning-focused models benefiting primarily from high-quality inputs rather than diverse
demonstrations.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 24

[Page 13]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Diagnostic Accuracy (%)
Caption Quality Score (τ)
Caption Quality vs. Diagnostic Accuracy
GPT-5-Nano · GPT-5-mini
GPT-5-Nano · Qwen2.5-VL
GPT-5-Nano · No Caption
Qwen-VL-Chat · GPT-5-mini
Qwen-VL-Chat · Qwen2.5-VL
Qwen-VL-Chat · No Caption
63.38
33.7
84.5
53.2
32.8
76
47
11
65
51.6
14.8
49.5
54.9
25.39
51
28.55
5.8
41.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Crop
Disease
Knowledge
Linear fit
 (R²=0.112)
Figure 3: Correlation between caption quality and diagnostic accuracy. The scatter plot shows a positive correlation
(R²=0.112) between caption quality scores (𝜏) and final diagnostic accuracy for our Agri-CPJ framework (Caption
+ Few-shot + LLM-as-a-Judge). Data points represent GPT-5-Nano (CPJ) and Qwen-VL-Chat (CPJ) across three
tasks: Crop Classification (circles), Disease Classification (squares), and Knowledge QA (triangles). Higher-quality
optimized captions (𝜏≥8.5) consistently yield better performance, with an average improvement of ∼12 percentage
points per quality score increase. The no-caption baseline (𝜏=0) demonstrates significantly lower accuracy, validating
the importance of caption enhancement in our CPJ framework.
Figure 4: Performance trends in the ablation study using Qwen2.5-VL-72B-Instruct with Explanational Captions
(EC). The figure shows progressive improvements from baseline to Agri-CPJ framework across three tasks: Crop
Classification (CC), Disease Classification (DC), and Crop Disease Knowledge (CDK). Both Qwen-VL-Chat and GPT-
5-Nano demonstrate consistent gains from caption optimization, few-shot prompting, and LLM-as-a-Judge selection,
validating the necessity of each component.
Adding the judge brings the Agri-CPJ framework to 54.90%/25.39%/51.0 for Qwen-VL-Chat and 52.40%/32.50%/73.0
for GPT-5-Nano. The 2 pp margin from judge-selected answers over arbitrarily chosen candidates appears modest, but
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 24

[Page 14]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Table 2: Error pattern analysis with frequency distribution from 150 sampled predictions. The table presents success
cases and four primary error categories with their frequencies and characteristics.
Category
Description & Frequency
Success Case
Bacterial leaf spot: Caption “necrotic lesions, yellow halos” →correct
diagnosis (9/10 QA score)
Early-stage Ambiguous
Minimal visual symptoms, insufficient diagnostic evidence (∼18%)
Co-infection Confusion
Multiple pathogens with overlapping symptoms (∼12%)
Low Caption Quality
Image artifacts degrade caption accuracy (∼8%)
Judge Bias
Favors verbose over factually accurate responses (∼5%)
the underlying score gap is not: selected answers average 4.9/5.0 versus 3.6/5.0 for rejected ones, confirming that the
judge is discriminating on content quality rather than selection order or response length.
4.5. Qualitative Analysis and Explainability
To check whether the judge’s automated selections are trustworthy, two PhD plant pathologists independently
scored a random 10% sample (𝑁= 396) of judged answer pairs from CDDMBench, using the same 5-point rubric.
Agreement with LLM selections was 94.2% (Cohen’s 𝜅= 0.88), average score gap between LLM and expert ratings
was 0.23 points, and Pearson 𝑟= 0.91 (𝑝< 0.001). The disagreements we examined tended to cluster on cases
where both answers were genuinely near-equal in quality—not cases where the judge was systematically wrong. We
are cautious about over-interpreting these numbers: the two experts share a common institutional background, and the
sample comes from a single benchmark. Independent replication across additional benchmarks and with expert panels
drawn from different institutional backgrounds would strengthen confidence in the 𝜅= 0.88 figure.
To make concrete what the pipeline produces, consider a tomato leaf presenting early blight symptoms. The refined
caption generated by the system reads: “Compound pinnate leaf exhibiting concentric ring-shaped necrotic lesions
(target-spot morphology), dark brown centres surrounded by chlorotic halos; lesions concentrated on older lower leaves,
ranging 5–15 mm in diameter, covering approximately 15–20% of the leaf surface.” The disease-focused candidate
correctly attributes the symptoms to Alternaria solani and proposes a fungicide rotation protocol; the crop-focused
candidate provides accurate tomato morphology but does not address the pathogen. The judge assigns scores of 4.8
and 4.2 respectively and selects the disease-focused answer, with the following rationale: “Answer 1 provides precise
pathogen identification, detailed symptom characterisation, and an actionable treatment recommendation; Answer 2
accurately describes plant anatomy but offers limited guidance for management decisions.” A practitioner reviewing
that rationale can assess the selection immediately and override it if their field judgement differs—without requiring
access to any internal model state.
This traceability—the capacity to locate disagreement at a specific, named component of the output—is the
interpretability property the system was designed to deliver. Each Agri-CPJ output comprises four elements: the refined
caption with its assigned quality score, both candidate answers with individual criterion scores, and the judge’s written
selection rationale. These together constitute an audit trail whose interpretation requires no knowledge of the underlying
model architecture.
Table 2 categorises failure modes across 150 sampled predictions. Early-stage ambiguous presentations account
for the largest share (approximately 18%): when infection has only recently established and the leaf surface remains
largely intact, observable symptom features are insufficient for reliable discrimination, and no captioning procedure
can recover signal that the image does not contain. Co-infection cases (12%) present a distinct structural problem—
the caption accurately characterises mixed symptom patterns, but the VQA stage is constrained to produce a single-
pathogen response, forcing a selection the evidence does not support. Low image quality (8%) introduces caption
inaccuracies through sensor noise and motion blur; pre-processing improvements could address this, though we did
not explore them here. Verbosity bias in the judge (5%) was attenuated but not eliminated by excluding response length
from the scoring criteria.
Each failure category maps to a specific architectural intervention. The 18% early-stage failure rate calls for
an explicit uncertainty output—a flag indicating that the image does not contain sufficient diagnostic evidence for
a confident conclusion—rather than a low-confidence label. Co-infection cases require a multi-label output format
evaluated holistically rather than a single-winner selection. The residual verbosity bias requires a stricter factuality
weighting in the judge rubric, for which we have not yet identified a stable formulation. These are presented as
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 24

[Page 15]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Table 3: Task-specific performance on AgMMU-MCQs (767 samples) across five agricultural tasks. Baseline models
from Gauba et al. (2025). Our Agri-CPJ progressively adds optimized captions, few-shot prompting, and LLM-as-a-
Judge selection, achieving competitive performance with GPT-5-Nano reaching 77.84% average accuracy and Qwen-
VL-Chat achieving 64.54%.
Model
Method
Disease/Issue Id.
Insect/Pest Id.
Species Recog.
Management Instr.
Symptom/Visual Descr.
Average
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o
Baseline (Gauba et al., 2025)
80.51
84.46
86.23
90.42
84.64
85.25
Gemini 1.5 Pro
76.25
79.92
81.07
88.08
76.94
80.42
SOTA Open-Source Models
LLaMA-3.2
Baseline (Gauba et al., 2025)
65.07
69.29
75.21
78.50
78.08
73.32
LLaVA-1.5-13B
60.18
62.76
60.71
70.78
61.63
63.00
Qwen-VL-7B
56.24
58.31
60.65
69.64
67.70
62.34
Ours
GPT-5-Nano
Zero-shot (No Caption)
65.47
70.14
73.79
72.67
51.69
66.23
Zero-shot (Caption, Optimized)
68.35
77.08
88.82
73.79
70.79
75.88
+ Few-shot
69.78
79.86
75.17
90.06
71.35
77.31
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
71.94
77.08
92.55
74.48
72.47
77.84
Qwen-VL-Chat
Zero-shot (No Caption)
45.71
52.78
56.85
73.01
52.51
56.48
Zero-shot (Caption, Optimized)
49.64
52.78
59.31
68.32
61.24
58.67
+ Few-shot
52.52
65.28
64.83
72.67
64.61
64.28
+ LLM-as-a-Judge
53.96
66.67
73.29
64.83
62.92
64.54
unresolved engineering problems rather than generic future directions; the modular pipeline structure means they can
be addressed as isolated components.
Where the pipeline succeeds, the mechanism is traceable. Explicit captions enable precise pathogen identification
by encoding the spatial and morphological observations that diagnostic keys depend on. For bacterial leaf spot, a
caption stating “necrotic lesions with yellow halos following angular patterns along vein boundaries” provides the
information that distinguishes bacterial from fungal infection—including the vein-delimited lesion geometry that is
the key discriminating feature. The judge’s factuality weighting contributes independently: selected answers achieved
73% correctness on CDDMBench disease classification versus 51% for randomly drawn answers from the same dual-
answer pool, confirming that the multi-criteria scoring filters content quality rather than preferring surface features
such as length or fluency.
4.6. Cross-Dataset Generalization on AgMMU-MCQs
Table 3 presents results on AgMMU-MCQs, which tests generalisation to a broader set of agricultural topics in
multiple-choice format.
GPT-5-Nano with the full Agri-CPJ configuration achieves 77.84%, positioned between LLaVA-OneVision-
8B (72.53%) and Gemini 1.5 Pro (80.42%) on the published leaderboard. The 7.41 pp deficit to Gemini is not
negligible; it plausibly reflects both the parameter scale difference and the fact that the caption generators used in
Agri-CPJ are considerably smaller than those underlying leading proprietary systems. Qwen-VL-Chat reaches 64.54%,
approximately level with LLaVA-1.5-7B (64.16%)—a reasonable comparison given the two models’ similar parameter
counts.
Aggregate accuracy, however, obscures substantial variation across the five task categories. Species recognition,
where diagnostic features are stable morphological properties, responds most strongly to explicit captioning; leaf
shape, venation pattern, and stem texture are precisely the observables that well-constructed captions encode.
Disease identification, by contrast, remains the hardest category (71.94%)—symptom overlap between pathogens
and the limited field of view of a single leaf photograph constrain achievable accuracy regardless of caption quality.
Management instruction sits between these extremes but is further complicated by the rubric calibration problem:
treatment recommendations phrased in the approximate terminology that agronomists routinely use are penalised by a
factuality-weighted scoring criterion calibrated on precise textbook formulations.
The per-task breakdown (Fig. 5) shows one striking outlier. Species recognition climbs from 73.79% without
captions to 92.55% with the full pipeline—a gain of nearly 19 pp. Plant species identity is almost entirely encoded
in morphological features that captions describe explicitly: leaf shape, venation, stem colour, petiole length. Disease
identification remains the hardest task at 71.94%, consistent with CDDMBench. Management instructions follow a
non-monotonic trajectory that we cannot fully account for: captions alone give 73.79%, few-shot pushes it to 90.06%,
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 24

[Page 16]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
0
20
40
60
80
100
Disease/Issue ID
Insect/Pest ID
Species Recog.
Management Instructions
Symptom / Visual Desc. 
AgMMU Cross-Domain Performance Comparison
GPT-5-Nano (Ours)
Qwen-VL-Chat (Ours)
LLaVA-1.5-13B
Qwen-VL-7B
Claude 3 Haiku
Figure 5: Task-specific performance on AgMMU-MCQs across five agricultural tasks. Our full Agri-CPJ with GPT-
5-Nano (CPJ, Ours) and Qwen-VL-Chat (CPJ, Ours) achieves competitive results. GPT-5-Nano reaches highest
performance on Species Recognition (92.55%) and demonstrates strong caption-enhanced reasoning effectiveness
across all tasks.
but the judge stage drops it back to 74.48%. The most plausible explanation is that the judge’s factuality-weighted
rubric penalises treatment recommendations phrased in approximate clinical language—language that is practically
sound but less precise than the textbook formulations the rubric was calibrated on.
The CDDMBench and AgMMU evaluations used identical prompts and exemplars—no adjustments were made
between the two. Caption enhancement on AgMMU contributed +9.65 pp (66.23% to 75.88% for GPT-5-Nano),
smaller than the +22.7 pp on CDDMBench disease classification but still substantial. The reduced magnitude is
likely partly attributable to format: multiple-choice questions constrain the answer space in a way that partially
compensates for weaker visual grounding. The 77.84% figure was not optimised for AgMMU, which is a relevant
point for contextualising it.
5. Conclusion
Agri-CPJ was built around one design claim: that forcing visual reasoning into an explicit, quality-checked text
representation before any diagnostic question is answered would simultaneously improve accuracy and produce outputs
that practitioners can inspect and correct. The experiments reported here support both parts. On CDDMBench,
attaching GPT-5-mini captions to GPT-5-Nano yields +22.7 pp in disease classification and +19.5 points on knowledge
QA without touching any model weight. On AgMMU-MCQs, the same pipeline achieves 77.84% with GPT-5-Nano
and 64.54% with Qwen-VL-Chat—results that hold without prompt modifications between the two benchmarks, and
that position the framework competitively against open-source models of similar scale. The human validation study
(𝜅= 0.88) indicates that judge selections track expert preferences closely, though the study draws from a single
benchmark and two experts with shared institutional backgrounds; replication with broader expert pools remains
necessary.
The failure modes are specific enough to point toward specific fixes. Early-stage images—where infection has
only just established and the leaf surface is largely intact—present a detection challenge that no amount of caption
quality can resolve; the appropriate system response is an explicit uncertainty signal rather than a low-confidence
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 24

[Page 17]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
label. Co-infection cases require multi-label output, not single-winner selection. The management instruction anomaly
on AgMMU traces to rubric calibration, not model deficiency. Three to five LLM API calls per query is a real cost at
deployment scale, and the pipeline has not been stress-tested against extreme distributional shifts in camera equipment
or crop growth stages.
The architectural argument for explicit intermediate representations is not specific to crop disease. Any setting in
which visual observations must be rendered in domain vocabulary before reasoning can proceed—medical imaging,
ecological monitoring, materials inspection—faces the same semantic gap. We have not tested those domains and make
no claim about transfer; but the structural problem Agri-CPJ addresses is not unique to agriculture, and the approach
is straightforwardly adaptable.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) under Grant 62506084, in part by the Science and Technology Development Fund of Macau SAR (Grant Nos.
FDCT/0007/2024/AKP, EF202400185-FST), the UM and UMDF (Grant Nos. MYRG-GRG2024-00165-FST-UMDF,
MYRGGRG2025-00236-FST, SHMDF-AI/2026/001).
References
Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al., 2023. Gpt-4
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .
Alayrac, J.B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Hasson, Y., Lenc, K., Mensch, A., Millican, K., Reynolds, M., et al., 2022. Flamingo: a
visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 35, 23716–23736.
Annam, S., Saxena, M., Kaushik, U., Mittal, S., 2025. Langchain: Simplifying development with language models. Textual Intelligence: Large
Language Models and Their Real-World Applications , 287–304.
Arshad, M.A., Jubery, T.Z., Roy, T., Nassiri, R., Singh, A.K., Singh, A., Hegde, C., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Balu, A., Krishnamurthy, A., et al.,
2025. Leveraging vision language models for specialized agricultural tasks, in: 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision (WACV), IEEE. pp. 6320–6329.
Badgujar, C.M., Poulose, A., Gan, H., 2024. Agricultural object detection with you only look once (yolo) algorithm: A bibliometric and systematic
literature review. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 223, 109090.
Bai, J., Bai, S., Yang, S., Wang, S., Tan, S., Wang, P., Lin, J., Zhou, C., Zhou, J., 2023. Qwen-vl: A versatile vision-language model for understanding,
localization. Text Reading, and Beyond 2, 1.
Cao, Y., Chen, L., Yuan, Y., Sun, G., 2023. Cucumber disease recognition with small samples using image-text-label-based multi-modal language
model. Computers and electronics in agriculture 211, 107993.
Chen, D., Chen, R., Zhang, S., Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Zhou, H., Zhang, Q., Wan, Y., Zhou, P., Sun, L., 2024. Mllm-as-a-judge: Assessing multimodal
llm-as-a-judge with vision-language benchmark, in: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning.
Dave, D., Agarwal, Y., Chouhan, H., Jambhulkar, S., 2025. Learning in langchain, in: World Congress on Smart Computing: Proceedings of WCSC
2024, Springer Nature. p. 29.
Dinga, G.T., Schiewe, J., 2025. What do you see? an xai approach for vlm-generated map descriptions. Advances in Cartography and GIScience of
the ICA 5, 12.
Dongre, V., Gui, C., Garg, S., Nayyeri, H., Tur, G., Hakkani-Tür, D., Adve, V.S., 2025. Mirage: A benchmark for multimodal information-seeking
and reasoning in agricultural expert-guided conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20100 .
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.,
2020. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 .
Duro, D.C., Franklin, S.E., Dubé, M.G., 2012. A comparison of pixel-based and object-based image analysis with selected machine learning
algorithms for the classification of agricultural landscapes using spot-5 hrg imagery. Remote sensing of environment 118, 259–272.
Gao, J., Li, Y., Cao, Z., Li, W., 2025. Interleaved-modal chain-of-thought, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 19520–19529.
Gauba, A., Pi, I., Man, Y., Pang, Z., Adve, V.S., Wang, Y.X., 2025. Agmmu: A comprehensive agricultural multimodal understanding and reasoning
benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10568 .
Hu, Z., Iscen, A., Sun, C., Wang, Z., Chang, K.W., Sun, Y., Schmid, C., Ross, D.A., Fathi, A., 2023. Reveal: Retrieval-augmented visual-language
pre-training with multi-source multimodal knowledge memory, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 23369–23379.
Jin, E., Feng, Q., Mou, Y., Lakemeyer, G., Decker, S., Simons, O., Stegmaier, J., 2025. Logicad: Explainable anomaly detection via vlm-based text
feature extraction, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4129–4137.
Kamal, M.S., Nimmy, S.F., Islam, M.R., Naseem, U., 2025. Explainable medical image captioning, in: Companion Proceedings of the ACM on
Web Conference 2025, pp. 2253–2261.
Kumar, S., Kaur, R., 2015. Plant disease detection using image processing-a review. International Journal of Computer Applications 124.
Lee, S., Kim, S., Park, S., Kim, G., Seo, M., 2024. Prometheus-vision: Vision-language model as a judge for fine-grained evaluation, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024, pp. 11286–11315.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 24

[Page 18]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S., 2023. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,
in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR. pp. 19730–19742.
Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J., 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems 36, 34892–34916.
Liu, X., Liu, Z., Hu, H., Chen, Z., Wang, K., Wang, K., Lian, S., 2024. A multimodal benchmark dataset and model for crop disease diagnosis, in:
European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer. pp. 157–170.
Lu, Y., Lu, X., Zheng, L., Sun, M., Chen, S., Chen, B., Wang, T., Yang, J., Lv, C., 2024. Application of multimodal transformer model in intelligent
agricultural disease detection and question-answering systems. Plants 13, 972.
Masala, M., Leordeanu, M., 2025. From vision to language through graph of events in space and time: An explainable self-supervised approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04815 .
Natarajan, P., Nambiar, A., 2024. Vale: A multimodal visual and language explanation framework for image classifiers using explainable ai and
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12808 .
Padarha, S., Semenova, E., Vidgen, B., Mahdi, A., Hale, S.A., 2025. Evaluating llm-as-a-judge under multilingual, multimodal and multi-domain
constraints, in: NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Evaluating the Evolving LLM Lifecycle: Benchmarks, Emergent Abilities, and Scaling.
Patil, R.R., Kumar, S., 2022. Rice-fusion: A multimodality data fusion framework for rice disease diagnosis. IEEE Access 10, 5207–5222.
Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al., 2021. Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision, in: International conference on machine learning, PmLR. pp. 8748–8763.
Ranario, E., Earles, M.J., 2025. Are vision-language models ready to zero-shot replace supervised classification models in agriculture? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.15977 .
Ren, J., Li, J., Noto, M., 2025. Performance analysis and enhancement of multimodal large language model phi-3.5 for plant disease recognition,
in: 2025 IEEE 5th International Conference on Computer Communication and Artificial Intelligence (CCAI), IEEE. pp. 102–107.
Saadati, M., Balu, A., Chiranjeevi, S., Jubery, T.Z., Singh, A.K., Sarkar, S., Singh, A., Ganapathysubramanian, B., 2024. Out-of-distribution
detection algorithms for robust insect classification. Plant Phenomics 6, 0170.
Shi, L., Ma, C., Liang, W., Diao, X., Ma, W., Vosoughi, S., 2025. Judging the judges: A systematic study of position bias in llm-as-a-judge, in:
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 292–314.
Shinoda, R., Inoue, N., Kataoka, H., Onishi, M., Ushiku, Y., 2025. Agrobench: Vision-language model benchmark in agriculture, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 7634–7644.
Song, I., Joo, M., Kwon, J., Jeon, E., Lee, J., 2026.
Instance-aligned captions for explainable video anomaly detection.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.08155 .
Su, K., et al., 2022. A survey on multimodal visual question answering: Datasets, methods and challenges. Pattern Recognition .
Topsakal, O., Akinci, T.C., 2023.
Creating large language model applications utilizing langchain: A primer on developing llm apps fast, in:
International conference on applied engineering and natural sciences, pp. 1050–1056.
Vu, H.N., Nguyen, A.D., Tran, D., 2025. Agridetectvl: Emphasizes the agriculture-focused application combined with visual–language integration.
IEEE Access 13, 195987–195995.
Wang, L., Jin, T., Yang, J., Leonardis, A., Wang, F., Zheng, F., 2024. Agri-llava: Knowledge-infused large multimodal assistant on agricultural pests
and diseases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02158 .
Xu, J., Lo, S.Y., Safaei, B., Patel, V.M., Dwivedi, I., 2025. Towards zero-shot anomaly detection and reasoning with multimodal large language
models, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 20370–20382.
Yadav, S., Kaushik, A., 2023. Comparative study of pre-trained language models for text classification in smart agriculture domain, in: Advances
in Data-driven Computing and Intelligent Systems: Selected Papers from ADCIS 2022, Volume 2. Springer, pp. 267–279.
Yang, B., Chen, Y., Feng, L., Zhang, Y., Xu, X., Zhang, J., Aierken, N., Huang, R., Lin, H., Ying, Y., Li, S., 2025. Agrigpt-vl: Agricultural
vision-language understanding suite. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04002, arXiv:2510.04002.
Yang, T., Mei, Y., Xu, L., Yu, H., Chen, Y., 2024. Application of question answering systems for intelligent agriculture production and sustainable
management: A review. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 204, 107497.
Ye, M., Liu, W., He, P., 2025. Vera: Explainable video anomaly detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models, in: Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 8679–8688.
Yin, S., Fu, C., Zhao, S., Xu, T., Wang, H., Sui, D., Shen, Y., Li, K., Sun, X., Chen, E., 2024. Woodpecker: Hallucination correction for multimodal
large language models. Science China Information Sciences 67, 220105.
Yu, G.H., Anh, L.H., Vu, D.T., Lee, J., Rahman, Z.U., Lee, H.Z., Jo, J.A., Kim, J.Y., 2025. Vl-paw: A vision–language dataset for pear, apple and
weed. Electronics 14, 2087.
Yu, P., Lin, B., 2024. A framework for agricultural intelligent analysis based on a visual language large model. Applied Sciences 14, 8350.
Zhang, K., Ma, L., Cui, B., Li, X., Zhang, B., Xie, N., 2024. Visual large language model for wheat disease diagnosis in the wild. Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture 227, 109587.
Zhang, W., Fang, T., Lu, L., Wang, L., Zhong, W., 2026. Cpj: Explainable agricultural pest diagnosis via caption–prompt–judge with llm-judged
refinement, in: ICASSP 2026 - 2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5156–5160.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP55912.2026.11464859.
Zhang, Z., Zhang, A., Li, M., Zhao, H., Karypis, G., Smola, A., 2023. Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.00923 .
Zhao, Q., Lu, Y., Kim, M.J., Fu, Z., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y., Li, Z., Ma, Q., Han, S., Finn, C., et al., 2025. Cot-vla: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for
vision-language-action models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1702–1713.
Zheng, G., Yang, B., Tang, J., Zhou, H.Y., Yang, S., 2023a. Ddcot: Duty-distinct chain-of-thought prompting for multimodal reasoning in language
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 5168–5191.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 24

[Page 19]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., et al., 2023b. Judging llm-as-a-judge with
mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems 36, 46595–46623.
Zhu, H., Qin, S., Su, M., Lin, C., Li, A., Gao, J., 2024.
Harnessing large vision and language models in agriculture: A review.
URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19679, arXiv:2407.19679.
Zhu, L., Wang, X., Wang, X., 2023. Judgelm: Fine-tuned large language models are scalable judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17631 .
A. Prompt Templates
This appendix documents the key system prompts used across all three Agri-CPJ stages. Core prompts are
reproduced verbatim; secondary prompts are summarised with representative excerpts.
A.1. Stage 1: Caption Generation and Refinement
A.1.1. Caption Generation System Prompt
The following system prompt instructs the VLM (Qwen2.5-VL-72B) to describe plant morphology and disease
symptoms without naming any crop species or disease, thereby minimising identification bias in downstream VQA:
You are an expert agricultural assistant specializing in
describing plant conditions from images.
## Core Task
Describe the visual features of the plant and any disease
symptoms in the image, without identifying the plant or
disease names.
## Key Requirements
1. Focus on describing the plant’s morphology, color, and
overall condition.
2. If disease symptoms are present, describe their appearance:
color, shape, distribution, size, quantity, and extent.
3. If no disease is visible, state that the plant appears
healthy.
4. Assess the severity and stage of any symptoms based on
visual cues.
5. Keep the description concise (90-100 words).
6. If uncertain about features, indicate "unable to describe
clearly" or "need more images".
## Output Format
{"image_caption": "Description of the plant’s visual features
and any disease symptoms, including morphology, color,
distribution, size, and condition, without naming the plant
or disease."}
Three few-shot exemplars accompany the prompt, covering fungal pustules, necrotic lesions, and powdery growth.
The fungal pustule exemplar is representative:
Table 4: Representative few-shot exemplar for caption generation (Stage 1).
Type
Exemplar Caption
Fungal pustules
The plant has long, slender leaves with numerous orange-brown pustules scattered on the surface. The
leaves show premature browning and some collapse. The symptoms suggest a fungal infection that reduces
plant vigor, with pustules measuring 1–2 mm in diameter. The condition appears moderate, affecting
approximately 30% of the leaf area.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 24

[Page 20]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
A.1.2. Caption Evaluation and Refinement Prompts
Captions are evaluated by an LLM judge on five criteria: (1) Accuracy, (2) Completeness, (3) Detail, (4) Relevance,
and (5) Clarity (80–120 words). The judge returns rating (1–10), reasoning, and suggestions. Captions scoring
below 𝜏= 8.0 are automatically refined. The refinement prompt instructs the model to address identified issues,
add specific symptom details, and maintain professional terminology within 80–120 words, guided by two exemplar
captions (...).
A.2. Stage 2: Dual-Answer VQA Generation
A.2.1. Disease Diagnosis System Prompt
The diagnosis VQA prompt (diagnosis_vqa.py) instructs the model to return two complementary answers from
different diagnostic perspectives. The core rules are:
...
## Rules
1. Base answers solely on image, caption, and question
2. Prioritize scientific accuracy
3. Never return empty answers
4. BOTH answers must include BOTH plant type and disease type
5. Answer1: Focus on PEST/DISEASE identification
(symptoms, severity, features)
6. Answer2: Focus on CROP identification
(type, variety, morphology)
7. Both answers should be scientifically accurate and detailed
The human-turn template is: Background(image_caption): {image_caption}\nQuestion: {question}.
Five few-shot examples are included; one representative case (apple Alternaria blotch, question: “Is this crop
diseased?”) yields: Answer 1 identifying Alternaria Blotch with circular brown lesions (2–5 mm) and yellowish halos,
and Answer 2 identifying the host as Malus domestica by ovate leaf shape and serrated margins.
A.2.2. Knowledge QA System Prompt
The knowledge QA prompt (knowledge_qa_vqa.py) is substantially more detailed, reflecting the open-ended
nature of agronomic questions. It defines scope, seven skills, and ten rules governing answer precision:
You are an agricultural expert specializing in plant disease
diagnosis and management.
Scope: rice blast, tomato leaf mold, wheat leaf rust, apple
gray/sooty/blotch diseases, maize northern leaf blight,
cucurbit powdery mildew, grape leaf blight, tomato yellow
leaf curl virus (TYLCV), pepper bacterial spot, and similar
field/greenhouse pathosystems.
## Skills
1. Extract disease context from background Q&A and question.
2. Diagnose and describe disease mechanisms, signs/symptoms,
and disease cycles; include differential diagnosis.
3. Translate product names to active ingredients; handle
dilutions and rates precisely (metric units).
4. Give practical, stage-specific recommendations (seed/
seedling, vegetative, reproductive), including timings,
intervals, and number of applications.
5. Integrate IPM: resistant varieties, sanitation, crop
rotation, canopy management, balanced fertilization
(N-P-K-Si), irrigation and drainage, environmental
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 24

[Page 21]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
control (temp/RH/ventilation).
6. Address resistance management: rotate modes of action
(e.g., FRAC for fungicides, IRAC for insecticides).
7. Ensure scientific accuracy, safety, and applicability.
## Rules (abridged)
1. Base answers on provided background; supplement only with
widely accepted general agronomic knowledge if needed.
2. If specific data (dose, interval, temperature threshold)
are provided in the background, use them verbatim.
3. Include active ingredient and formulation when available
(e.g., 20% tebuconazole EC); provide dilution ratios,
spray volume, timing, interval, and number of sprays.
4. For cultural practices, include actionable details:
balanced N-P-K, silicon/potash, drainage, plant spacing,
pruning for airflow, temperature/RH targets.
5. Rotate fungicides with different FRAC codes; avoid more
than 2 consecutive applications of the same MoA.
6. Provide TWO answers:
Answer1: Treatment, prevention, and control (step-by-step
IPM with specific methods, timings, dosages, intervals).
Answer2: Disease explanation (symptoms, causes/etiology,
disease cycle/epidemiology, conducive conditions).
7. Advise PPE, follow local labels, observe pre-harvest
intervals (PHI) and re-entry intervals (REI).
Five few-shot examples are included. Table 5 shows one representative case:
Table 5: Representative few-shot example for knowledge QA (Stage 2).
Input
Output
Caption:
Plant:
Wheat;
Disease:
Leaf
Rust...
Question: What control techniques are
applicable to Wheat Leaf Rust?
Answer 1 (Treatment): Control mainly relies on planting resistant varieties, supple-
mented by chemical treatments. Plant resistant varieties such as Shaanong 7859, Ji 5418.
Seed dressing: 0.03–0.04% triazolone. Foliar spray: 20% triazolone 1000× at disease
onset, repeat every 10–20 days. Cultural: sow at appropriate time, eliminate volunteers,
ensure drainage.
Answer 2 (Explanation): Wheat Leaf Rust is caused by Puccinia triticina. Pathogen
overwinters on stubble; spreads via wind-borne urediniospores in spring (optimal 15–
22°C). Multiple infection cycles possible during growing season, leading to premature
leaf senescence and yield loss.
A.3. Stage 3: LLM-as-a-Judge Answer Selection
A.3.1. Diagnosis Judge System Prompt
The judge for the disease diagnosis task (diagnosis_judge.py) evaluates five criteria and returns a structured
JSON decision:
You are an agricultural expert evaluating two answers to a
question about plant disease diagnosis.
## Evaluation Criteria:
1. Accuracy of Plant Identification: Correct identification
of crop species
2. Accuracy of Disease/Pest Identification: Correct
identification of disease or pest
3. Symptom Description Accuracy: Precise description of
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 24

[Page 22]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
disease symptoms
4. Adherence to Required Format: Proper structure with plant
and disease identification
5. Completeness and Professionalism: Comprehensive and
scientifically sound response
## Task:
Compare Answer 1 and Answer 2 based on the above criteria
and select the better one.
## Output Format:
{
"choice": 1 or 2,
"reason": "Brief explanation for your choice",
"scores": {
"answer1": {
"plant_accuracy": 0-1,
"disease_accuracy": 0-1,
"symptom_accuracy": 0-1,
"format_adherence": 0-1,
"completeness": 0-1,
"total": 0-5
},
"answer2": { ... }
}
}
When total scores are within 0.3 points, the tie-breaking rule selects the answer with higher plant_accuracy +
disease_accuracy. Three few-shot examples are included; one representative case is shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Representative few-shot example for the diagnosis judge (Stage 3).
Input
Judge Output
Q: What disease is affecting this plant?
Caption: Apple leaf with Alternaria blotch...
A1: Apple leaf with Alternaria blotch. Symptoms include circular
brown spots with yellow halos.
A2: This leaf might be diseased. It has some spots.
{"choice": 1, "reason": "Answer 1 correctly
identifies both plant (apple) and disease
(Alternaria blotch) with specific symptoms.
Answer 2 is vague.", "scores": {"answer1":
{"plant_accuracy": 1.0, "disease_accuracy": 1.0,
"symptom_accuracy": 0.9, "format_adherence": 1.0,
"completeness": 0.9, "total": 4.8}, "answer2":
{"total": 1.6}}}
A.3.2. Knowledge QA Judge System Prompt
The knowledge QA judge (knowledge_qa_judge.py) follows the same output format but evaluates five different
criteria suited to open-ended agronomic questions: (1) Accuracy, (2) Completeness, (3) Specificity, (4) Practicality,
and (5) Scientific Validity. Three few-shot examples follow the same structure as the diagnosis judge (...).
B. Evaluation Rubrics
B.1. Caption Quality Rubric (10-point scale)
Captions are evaluated across five dimensions, each contributing to an overall holistic score:
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 22 of 24

[Page 23]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Table 7: Caption quality evaluation criteria (10-point scale).
Criterion
Description
Quality Level
Accuracy
Correct identification of plant features and disease symptoms
9–10: Excellent
Completeness
Includes plant type, symptoms, severity, and stage
7–8: Good
Detail
Specific measurements, locations, and patterns
5–6: Fair
Relevance
Information useful for downstream diagnosis
2–4: Poor
Clarity
Professional terminology, 80–120 words
1: Unacceptable
B.2. Answer Selection Rubric: Disease Diagnosis (5-point scale)
Each criterion is scored 0–1 and summed for a total of 0–5:
Table 8: Answer selection criteria for disease diagnosis task.
Criterion
Description
Scoring
Plant Accuracy
Correct crop species identification
1.0: Precise; 0.5: Genus; 0.0: Wrong
Disease Accuracy
Correct disease/pest identification
1.0: Specific; 0.5: Type; 0.0: Wrong
Symptom Accuracy
Precise symptom description
1.0: Detailed; 0.5: General; 0.0: In-
accurate
Format Adherence
Includes both plant AND disease ID
1.0: Both; 0.5: One; 0.0: Neither
Completeness
Comprehensive and professional
1.0: Complete; 0.5: Partial; 0.0: Min-
imal
B.3. Answer Selection Rubric: Knowledge QA (5-point scale)
Table 9: Answer selection criteria for knowledge QA task.
Criterion
Description
Scoring
Accuracy
Scientifically correct information
1.0: All correct; 0.5: Mostly; 0.0: Er-
rors
Completeness
Covers all relevant aspects
1.0: Comprehensive; 0.5: Partial;
0.0: Minimal
Specificity
Precise details (rates, timings, methods)
1.0: Specific; 0.5: General; 0.0:
Vague
Practicality
Actionable for farmers
1.0: Practical; 0.5: Somewhat; 0.0:
Not useful
Sci. Validity
Evidence-based, proper terminology
1.0: Rigorous; 0.5: Adequate; 0.0:
Questionable
C. Pipeline Data Schema
Each stage of the Agri-CPJ pipeline consumes and produces JSON records. Table 10 summarises the fields added
at each stage.
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 23 of 24

[Page 24]
Agri-CPJ: A Training-Free Explainable Framework for Agricultural Pest Diagnosis
Table 10: JSON field evolution across Agri-CPJ pipeline stages.
Stage
Fields Added
Description
Input
question_id, image,
question, answer
Unique ID; image path; question text; ground-truth answer
Stage 1
image_caption, rating,
reasoning, suggestions,
evaluated, optimized
Generated caption; quality score (1–10); evaluation rationale;
improvement suggestions; processing flags
Stage 2
generation_answer1,
generation_answer2
Disease-focused answer; crop-focused answer
Stage 3
generation_answer,
selected_answer,
selected_score,
unselected_score,
evaluation_reason
Final answer; selected candidate (answer1/answer2); scores on
0–5 scale; judge rationale
A complete end-to-end example record after Stage 3:
{
"question_id": "test_0001",
"image": "leaf.jpg",
"question": "Is this crop diseased?",
"image_caption": "Compound pinnate leaf exhibiting dark brown
circular lesions (3-8 mm) with yellow halos...",
"rating": 9,
"generation_answer1": "Yes, bacterial necrotic lesions...",
"generation_answer2": "Yes, compound pinnate leaf showing...",
"generation_answer": "Yes, bacterial necrotic lesions...",
"selected_answer": "answer1",
"selected_score": 4.7,
"unselected_score": 3.2,
"evaluation_reason": "Answer 1 provides specific disease
identification with detailed symptom description."
}
Anonymous: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 24 of 24